The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Complete Works of Whittier, by 
John Greenleaf Whittier

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Complete Works of Whittier
       The Standard Library Edition with a linked Index

Author: John Greenleaf Whittier

Release Date: January 2006  [EBook #9600]
Posting Date: July 10, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WHITTIER ***




Produced by David Widger





THE COMPLETE WORKS OF JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER


By John Greenleaf Whittier





VOLUME I. NARRATIVE AND LEGENDARY POEMS




PUBLISHERS' ADVERTISEMENT

The Standard Library Edition of Mr. Whittier's  writings comprises his
poetical and prose works as re-arranged and thoroughly revised by
himself or with his cooperation.  Mr. Whittier has supplied  such
additional information regarding the subject and occasion of certain
poems as may be stated in brief head-notes, and this edition has been
much enriched by the poet's personal comment. So far as practicable the
dates of publication of the various articles have been given, and since
these were  originally published soon after composition, the dates of
their first appearance have been taken as  determining the time at which
they were written. At the request of the Publishers, Mr. Whittier  has
allowed his early poems, discarded from previous collections, to be
placed, in the general order  of their appearance, in an appendix to the
final volume of poems. By this means the present edition is made so
complete and retrospective that students of the poet's career will
always find the most abundant material for their purpose. The Publishers
congratulate themselves and the public that the careful attention which
Mr. Whittier has been able to give to this revision of his works has
resulted in so comprehensive and well-adjusted a collection.

The portraits prefixed to the several volumes have been chosen with a
view to illustrating successive periods in the poet's life.  The
original sources and dates are indicated in each case.


     CONTENTS:

     THE VAUDOIS TEACHER
     THE FEMALE MARTYR
     EXTRACT FROM "A NEW ENGLAND LEGEND"
     THE DEMON OF THE STUDY
     THE FOUNTAIN
     PENTUCKET
     THE NORSEMEN
     FUNERAL TREE OF THE SOKOKIS
     ST JOHN
     THE CYPRESS-TREE OF CEYLON
     THE EXILES
     THE KNIGHT OF ST JOHN
     CASSANDRA SOUTHWICK
     THE NEW WIFE AND THE OLD

     THE BRIDAL OF PENNACOOK
          I.    THE MERRIMAC
          II.   THE BASHABA
          III.  THE DAUGHTER
          IV.   THE WEDDING
          V.    THE NEW HOME
          VI.   AT PENNACOOK
          VII.  THE DEPARTURE
          VIII. SONG OF INDIAN WOMEN

     BARCLAY OF URY
     THE ANGELS OF BUENA VISTA
     THE LEGEND OF ST MARK
     KATHLEEN
     THE WELL OF LOCH MAREE
     THE CHAPEL OF THE HERMITS
     TAULER
     THE HERMIT OF THE THEBAID
     THE GARRISON OF CAPE ANN
     THE GIFT OF TRITEMIUS
     SKIPPER IRESON'S RIDE
     THE SYCAMORES
     THE PIPES AT LUCKNOW
     TELLING THE BEES
     THE SWAN SONG OF PARSON AVERY
     THE DOUBLE-HEADED SNAKE OF NEWBURY

     MABEL MARTIN: A HARVEST IDYL
          PROEM
          I.    THE RIVER VALLEY
          II.   THE HUSKING
          III.  THE WITCH'S DAUGHTER
          IV.   THE CHAMPION
          V.    IN THE SHADOW
          VI.   THE BETROTHAL

     THE PROPHECY OF SAMUEL SEWALL
     THE RED RIVER VOYAGEUR
     THE PREACHER
     THE TRUCE OF PISCATAQUA
     MY PLAYMATE
     COBBLER KEEZAR'S VISION
     AMY WENTWORTH
     THE COUNTESS

     AMONG THE HILLS
          PRELUDE
          AMONG THE HILLS

     THE DOLE OF JARL THORKELL
     THE TWO RABBINS
     NOREMBEGA
     MIRIAM
     MAUD MULLER
     MARY GARVIN
     THE RANGER
     NAUHAUGHT, THE DEACON
     THE SISTERS
     MARGUERITE
     THE ROBIN

     THE PENNSYLVANIA PILGRIM
          INTRODUCTORY NOTE
          PRELUDE
          THE PENNSYLVANIA PILGRIM

     KING VOLMER AND ELSIE
     THE THREE BELLS
     JOHN UNDERHILL
     CONDUCTOR BRADLEY
     THE WITCH OF WENHAM
     KING SOLOMON AND THE ANTS
     IN THE "OLD SOUTH"
     THE HENCHMAN
     THE DEAD FEAST OF THE KOL-FOLK
     THE KHAN'S DEVIL
     THE KING'S MISSIVE
     VALUATION
     RABBI ISHMAEL
     THE ROCK-TOMB OF BRADORE

     THE BAY OF SEVEN ISLANDS
          To H P S
          THE BAY OF SEVEN ISLANDS

     THE WISHING BRIDGE
     HOW THE WOMEN WENT FROM DOVER
     ST GREGORY'S GUEST
     CONTENTS
     BIRCHBROOK MILL
     THE TWO ELIZABETHS
     REQUITAL
     THE HOMESTEAD
     HOW THE ROBIN CAME
     BANISHED FROM MASSACHUSETTS
     THE BROWN DWARF OF RUGEN


NOTE.--The portrait prefixed to this volume was etched by
S. A. Schoff, in 1888, after a painting by Bass Otis, a pupil of
Gilbert Stuart, made in the winter of 1836-1837.




PROEM

     I LOVE the old melodious lays
     Which softly melt the ages through,
     The songs of Spenser's golden days,
     Arcadian Sidney's silvery phrase,
     Sprinkling our noon of time with freshest morning dew.

     Yet, vainly in my quiet hours
     To breathe their marvellous notes I try;
     I feel them, as the leaves and flowers
     In silence feel the dewy showers,
     And drink with glad, still lips the blessing of the sky.

     The rigor of a frozen clime,
     The harshness of an untaught ear,
     The jarring words of one whose rhyme
     Beat often Labor's hurried time,
     Or Duty's rugged march through storm and strife, are here.

     Of mystic beauty, dreamy grace,
     No rounded art the lack supplies;
     Unskilled the subtle lines to trace,
     Or softer shades of Nature's face,
     I view her common forms with unanointed eyes.

     Nor mine the seer-like power to show
     The secrets of the heart and mind;
     To drop the plummet-line below
     Our common world of joy and woe,
     A more intense despair or brighter hope to find.

     Yet here at least an earnest sense
     Of human right and weal is shown;
     A hate of tyranny intense,
     And hearty in its vehemence,
     As if my brother's pain and sorrow were my own.

     O Freedom! if to me belong
     Nor mighty Milton's gift divine,
     Nor Marvell's wit and graceful song,
     Still with a love as deep and strong
     As theirs, I lay, like them, my best gifts on thy shrine.

     AMESBURY, 11th mo., 1847.




INTRODUCTION

The edition of my poems published in 1857 contained the following note
by way of preface:--

"In these volumes, for the first time, a complete collection of my
poetical writings has been made. While it is satisfactory to know that
these scattered children of my brain have found a home, I cannot but
regret that I have been unable, by reason of illness, to give that
attention to their revision and arrangement, which respect for the
opinions of others and my own afterthought and experience demand.

"That there are pieces in this collection which I would 'willingly let
die,' I am free to confess. But it is now too late to disown them, and I
must submit to the inevitable penalty of poetical as well as other sins.
There are others, intimately connected with the author's life and times,
which owe their tenacity of vitality to the circumstances under which
they were written, and the events by which they were suggested.

"The long poem of Mogg Megone was in a great measure composed in early
life; and it is scarcely necessary to say that its subject is not such
as the writer would have chosen at any subsequent period."

After a lapse of thirty years since the above was written, I have been
requested by my publishers to make some preparation for a new and
revised edition of my poems. I cannot flatter myself that I have added
much to the interest of the work beyond the correction of my own errors
and those of the press, with the addition of a few heretofore
unpublished pieces, and occasional notes of explanation which seemed
necessary. I have made an attempt to classify the poems under a few
general heads, and have transferred the long poem of Mogg Megone to the
Appendix, with other specimens of my earlier writings. I have endeavored
to affix the dates of composition or publication as far as possible.

In looking over these poems I have not been unmindful of occasional
prosaic lines and verbal infelicities, but at this late day I have
neither strength nor patience to undertake their correction.

Perhaps a word of explanation may be needed in regard to a class of
poems written between the years 1832 and 1865. Of their defects from an
artistic point of view it is not necessary to speak. They were the
earnest and often vehement expression of the writer's thought and
feeling at critical periods in the great conflict between Freedom and
Slavery. They were written with no expectation that they would survive
the occasions which called them forth: they were protests, alarm
signals, trumpet-calls to action, words wrung from the writer's heart,
forged at white heat, and of course lacking the finish and careful
word-selection which reflection and patient brooding over them might
have given. Such as they are, they belong to the history of the
Anti-Slavery movement, and may serve as way-marks of its progress. If
their language at times seems severe and harsh, the monstrous wrong of
Slavery which provoked it must be its excuse, if any is needed. In
attacking it, we did not measure our words. "It is," said Garrison,
"a waste of politeness to be courteous to the devil." But in truth the
contest was, in a great measure, an impersonal one,--hatred of slavery
and not of slave-masters.

                    "No common wrong provoked our zeal,
                    The silken gauntlet which is thrown
                    In such a quarrel rings like steel."

Even Thomas Jefferson, in his terrible denunciation of Slavery in the
Notes on Virginia, says "It is impossible to be temperate and pursue the
subject of Slavery." After the great contest was over, no class of the
American people were more ready, with kind words and deprecation of
harsh retaliation, to welcome back the revolted States than the
Abolitionists; and none have since more heartily rejoiced at the fast
increasing prosperity of the South.

Grateful for the measure of favor which has been accorded to my
writings, I leave this edition with the public. It contains all that I
care to re-publish, and some things which, had the matter of choice been
left solely to myself, I should have omitted.
                                               J. G. W.





NARRATIVE AND LEGENDARY POEMS




THE VAUDOIS TEACHER.

This poem was suggested by the account given of the manner which the
Waldenses disseminated their principles among the Catholic gentry. They
gained access to the house through their occupation as peddlers of
silks, jewels, and trinkets. "Having disposed of some of their goods,"
it is said by a writer who quotes the inquisitor Rainerus Sacco, "they
cautiously intimated that they had commodities far more valuable than
these, inestimable jewels, which they would show if they could be
protected from the clergy. They would then give their purchasers a Bible
or Testament; and thereby many were deluded into heresy." The poem,
under the title Le Colporteur Vaudois, was translated into French by
Professor G. de Felice, of Montauban, and further naturalized by
Professor Alexandre Rodolphe Vinet, who quoted it in his lectures on
French literature, afterwards published. It became familiar in this form
to the Waldenses, who adopted it as a household poem. An American
clergyman, J. C. Fletcher, frequently heard it when he was a student,
about the year 1850, in the theological seminary at Geneva, Switzerland,
but the authorship of the poem was unknown to those who used it.
Twenty-five years later, Mr. Fletcher, learning the name of the author,
wrote to the moderator of the Waldensian synod at La Tour, giving the
information. At the banquet which closed the meeting of the synod, the
moderator announced the fact, and was instructed in the name of the
Waldensian church to write to me a letter of thanks. My letter, written
in reply, was translated into Italian and printed throughout Italy.

     "O LADY fair, these silks of mine
          are beautiful and rare,--
     The richest web of the Indian loom, which beauty's
          queen might wear;
     And my pearls are pure as thy own fair neck, with whose
          radiant light they vie;
     I have brought them with me a weary way,--will my
          gentle lady buy?"

     The lady smiled on the worn old man through the
          dark and clustering curls
     Which veiled her brow, as she bent to view his
          silks and glittering pearls;
     And she placed their price in the old man's hand
          and lightly turned away,
     But she paused at the wanderer's earnest call,--
          "My gentle lady, stay!

     "O lady fair, I have yet a gem which a purer
          lustre flings,
     Than the diamond flash of the jewelled crown on
          the lofty brow of kings;
     A wonderful pearl of exceeding price, whose virtue
          shall not decay,
     Whose light shall be as a spell to thee and a
          blessing on thy way!"

     The lady glanced at the mirroring steel where her
          form of grace was seen,
     Where her eye shone clear, and her dark locks
          waved their clasping pearls between;
     "Bring forth thy pearl of exceeding worth, thou
          traveller gray and old,
     And name the price of thy precious gem, and my
          page shall count thy gold."

     The cloud went off from the pilgrim's brow, as a
          small and meagre book,
     Unchased with gold or gem of cost, from his
          folding robe he took!
     "Here, lady fair, is the pearl of price, may it prove
          as such to thee
     Nay, keep thy gold--I ask it not, for the word of
          God is free!"

     The hoary traveller went his way, but the gift he
          left behind
     Hath had its pure and perfect work on that high-
          born maiden's mind,
     And she hath turned from the pride of sin to the
          lowliness of truth,
     And given her human heart to God in its beautiful
          hour of youth

     And she hath left the gray old halls, where an evil
          faith had power,
     The courtly knights of her father's train, and the
          maidens of her bower;
     And she hath gone to the Vaudois vales by lordly
          feet untrod,
     Where the poor and needy of earth are rich in the
          perfect love of God!
     1830.




THE FEMALE MARTYR.

Mary G-----, aged eighteen, a "Sister of Charity," died in one  of our
Atlantic cities, during the prevalence of the Indian cholera, while
in voluntary attendance upon the sick.


     "BRING out your dead!" The midnight street
     Heard and gave back the hoarse, low call;
     Harsh fell the tread of hasty feet,
     Glanced through the dark the coarse white sheet,
     Her coffin and her pall.
     "What--only one!" the brutal hack-man said,
     As, with an oath, he spurned away the dead.

     How sunk the inmost hearts of all,
     As rolled that dead-cart slowly by,
     With creaking wheel and harsh hoof-fall!
     The dying turned him to the wall,
     To hear it and to die!
     Onward it rolled; while oft its driver stayed,
     And hoarsely clamored, "Ho! bring out your dead."

     It paused beside the burial-place;
     "Toss in your load!" and it was done.
     With quick hand and averted face,
     Hastily to the grave's embrace
     They cast them, one by one,
     Stranger and friend, the evil and the just,
     Together trodden in the churchyard dust.

     And thou, young martyr! thou wast there;
     No white-robed sisters round thee trod,
     Nor holy hymn, nor funeral prayer
     Rose through the damp and noisome air,
     Giving thee to thy God;
     Nor flower, nor cross, nor hallowed taper gave
     Grace to the dead, and beauty to the grave!

     Yet, gentle sufferer! there shall be,
     In every heart of kindly feeling,
     A rite as holy paid to thee
     As if beneath the convent-tree
     Thy sisterhood were kneeling,
     At vesper hours, like sorrowing angels, keeping
     Their tearful watch around thy place of sleeping.

     For thou wast one in whom the light
     Of Heaven's own love was kindled well;
     Enduring with a martyr's might,
     Through weary day and wakeful night,
     Far more than words may tell
     Gentle, and meek, and lowly, and unknown,
     Thy mercies measured by thy God alone!

     Where manly hearts were failing, where
     The throngful street grew foul with death,
     O high-souled martyr! thou wast there,
     Inhaling, from the loathsome air,
     Poison with every breath.
     Yet shrinking not from offices of dread
     For the wrung dying, and the unconscious dead.

     And, where the sickly taper shed
     Its light through vapors, damp, confined,
     Hushed as a seraph's fell thy tread,
     A new Electra by the bed
     Of suffering human-kind!
     Pointing the spirit, in its dark dismay,
     To that pure hope which fadeth not away.

     Innocent teacher of the high
     And holy mysteries of Heaven!
     How turned to thee each glazing eye,
     In mute and awful sympathy,
     As thy low prayers were given;
     And the o'er-hovering Spoiler wore, the while,
     An angel's features, a deliverer's smile!

     A blessed task! and worthy one
     Who, turning from the world, as thou,
     Before life's pathway had begun
     To leave its spring-time flower and sun,
     Had sealed her early vow;
     Giving to God her beauty and her youth,
     Her pure affections and her guileless truth.

     Earth may not claim thee. Nothing here
     Could be for thee a meet reward;
     Thine is a treasure far more dear
     Eye hath not seen it, nor the ear
     Of living mortal heard
     The joys prepared, the promised bliss above,
     The holy presence of Eternal Love!

     Sleep on in peace. The earth has not
     A nobler name than thine shall be.
     The deeds by martial manhood wrought,
     The lofty energies of thought,
     The fire of poesy,
     These have but frail and fading honors; thine
     Shall Time unto Eternity consign.

     Yea, and when thrones shall crumble down,
     And human pride and grandeur fall,
     The herald's line of long renown,
     The mitre and the kingly crown,--
     Perishing glories all!
     The pure devotion of thy generous heart
     Shall live in Heaven, of which it was a part.
     1833.




EXTRACT FROM "A NEW ENGLAND LEGEND."

(Originally a part of the author's Moll Pitcher.)


     How has New England's romance fled,
     Even as a vision of the morning!
     Its rites foredone, its guardians dead,
     Its priestesses, bereft of dread,
     Waking the veriest urchin's scorning!
     Gone like the Indian wizard's yell
     And fire-dance round the magic rock,
     Forgotten like the Druid's spell
     At moonrise by his holy oak!
     No more along the shadowy glen
     Glide the dim ghosts of murdered men;
     No more the unquiet churchyard dead
     Glimpse upward from their turfy bed,
     Startling the traveller, late and lone;
     As, on some night of starless weather,
     They silently commune together,
     Each sitting on his own head-stone
     The roofless house, decayed, deserted,
     Its living tenants all departed,
     No longer rings with midnight revel
     Of witch, or ghost, or goblin evil;
     No pale blue flame sends out its flashes
     Through creviced roof and shattered sashes!
     The witch-grass round the hazel spring
     May sharply to the night-air sing,
     But there no more shall withered hags
     Refresh at ease their broomstick nags,
     Or taste those hazel-shadowed waters
     As beverage meet for Satan's daughters;
     No more their mimic tones be heard,
     The mew of cat, the chirp of bird,
     Shrill blending with the hoarser laughter
     Of the fell demon following after!
     The cautious goodman nails no more
     A horseshoe on his outer door,
     Lest some unseemly hag should fit
     To his own mouth her bridle-bit;
     The goodwife's churn no more refuses
     Its wonted culinary uses
     Until, with heated needle burned,
     The witch has to her place returned!
     Our witches are no longer old
     And wrinkled beldames, Satan-sold,
     But young and gay and laughing creatures,
     With the heart's sunshine on their features;
     Their sorcery--the light which dances
     Where the raised lid unveils its glances;
     Or that low-breathed and gentle tone,
     The music of Love's twilight hours,
     Soft, dream-like, as a fairy's moan
     Above her nightly closing flowers,
     Sweeter than that which sighed of yore
     Along the charmed Ausonian shore!
     Even she, our own weird heroine,
     Sole Pythoness of ancient Lynn,'
     Sleeps calmly where the living laid her;
     And the wide realm of sorcery,
     Left by its latest mistress free,
     Hath found no gray and skilled invader.
     So--perished Albion's "glammarye,"
     With him in Melrose Abbey sleeping,
     His charmed torch beside his knee,
     That even the dead himself might see
     The magic scroll within his keeping.
     And now our modern Yankee sees
     Nor omens, spells, nor mysteries;
     And naught above, below, around,
     Of life or death, of sight or sound,
     Whate'er its nature, form, or look,
     Excites his terror or surprise,
     All seeming to his knowing eyes
     Familiar as his "catechise,"
     Or "Webster's Spelling-Book."

     1833.




THE DEMON OF THE STUDY.

     THE Brownie sits in the Scotchman's room,
     And eats his meat and drinks his ale,
     And beats the maid with her unused broom,
     And the lazy lout with his idle flail;
     But he sweeps the floor and threshes the corn,
     And hies him away ere the break of dawn.

     The shade of Denmark fled from the sun,
     And the Cocklane ghost from the barn-loft cheer,
     The fiend of Faust was a faithful one,
     Agrippa's demon wrought in fear,
     And the devil of Martin Luther sat
     By the stout monk's side in social chat.

     The Old Man of the Sea, on the neck of him
     Who seven times crossed the deep,
     Twined closely each lean and withered limb,
     Like the nightmare in one's sleep.
     But he drank of the wine, and Sindbad cast
     The evil weight from his back at last.

     But the demon that cometh day by day
     To my quiet room and fireside nook,
     Where the casement light falls dim and gray
     On faded painting and ancient book,
     Is a sorrier one than any whose names
     Are chronicled well by good King James.

     No bearer of burdens like Caliban,
     No runner of errands like Ariel,
     He comes in the shape of a fat old man,
     Without rap of knuckle or pull of bell;
     And whence he comes, or whither he goes,
     I know as I do of the wind which blows.

     A stout old man with a greasy hat
     Slouched heavily down to his dark, red nose,
     And two gray eyes enveloped in fat,
     Looking through glasses with iron bows.
     Read ye, and heed ye, and ye who can,
     Guard well your doors from that old man!

     He comes with a careless "How d' ye do?"
     And seats himself in my elbow-chair;
     And my morning paper and pamphlet new
     Fall forthwith under his special care,
     And he wipes his glasses and clears his throat,
     And, button by button, unfolds his coat.

     And then he reads from paper and book,
     In a low and husky asthmatic tone,
     With the stolid sameness of posture and look
     Of one who reads to himself alone;
     And hour after hour on my senses come
     That husky wheeze and that dolorous hum.

     The price of stocks, the auction sales,
     The poet's song and the lover's glee,
     The horrible murders, the seaboard gales,
     The marriage list, and the jeu d'esprit,
     All reach my ear in the self-same tone,--
     I shudder at each, but the fiend reads on!

     Oh, sweet as the lapse of water at noon
     O'er the mossy roots of some forest tree,
     The sigh of the wind in the woods of June,
     Or sound of flutes o'er a moonlight sea,
     Or the low soft music, perchance, which seems
     To float through the slumbering singer's dreams,

     So sweet, so dear is the silvery tone,
     Of her in whose features I sometimes look,
     As I sit at eve by her side alone,
     And we read by turns, from the self-same book,
     Some tale perhaps of the olden time,
     Some lover's romance or quaint old rhyme.

     Then when the story is one of woe,--
     Some prisoner's plaint through his dungeon-bar,
     Her blue eye glistens with tears, and low
     Her voice sinks down like a moan afar;
     And I seem to hear that prisoner's wail,
     And his face looks on me worn and pale.

     And when she reads some merrier song,
     Her voice is glad as an April bird's,
     And when the tale is of war and wrong,
     A trumpet's summons is in her words,
     And the rush of the hosts I seem to hear,
     And see the tossing of plume and spear!

     Oh, pity me then, when, day by day,
     The stout fiend darkens my parlor door;
     And reads me perchance the self-same lay
     Which melted in music, the night before,
     From lips as the lips of Hylas sweet,
     And moved like twin roses which zephyrs meet!

     I cross my floor with a nervous tread,
     I whistle and laugh and sing and shout,
     I flourish my cane above his head,
     And stir up the fire to roast him out;
     I topple the chairs, and drum on the pane,
     And press my hands on my ears, in vain!

     I've studied Glanville and James the wise,
     And wizard black-letter tomes which treat
     Of demons of every name and size
     Which a Christian man is presumed to meet,
     But never a hint and never a line
     Can I find of a reading fiend like mine.

     I've crossed the Psalter with Brady and Tate,
     And laid the Primer above them all,
     I've nailed a horseshoe over the grate,
     And hung a wig to my parlor wall
     Once worn by a learned Judge, they say,
     At Salem court in the witchcraft day!

     "Conjuro te, sceleratissime,
     Abire ad tuum locum!"--still
     Like a visible nightmare he sits by me,--
     The exorcism has lost its skill;
     And I hear again in my haunted room
     The husky wheeze and the dolorous hum!

     Ah! commend me to Mary Magdalen
     With her sevenfold plagues, to the wandering Jew,
     To the terrors which haunted Orestes when
     The furies his midnight curtains drew,
     But charm him off, ye who charm him can,
     That reading demon, that fat old man!

     1835.




THE FOUNTAIN.

On the declivity of a hill in Salisbury, Essex County, is a fountain of
clear water, gushing from the very roots of a venerable oak. It is about
two miles from the junction of the Powow River with the Merrimac.

     TRAVELLER! on thy journey toiling
     By the swift Powow,
     With the summer sunshine falling
     On thy heated brow,
     Listen, while all else is still,
     To the brooklet from the hill.

     Wild and sweet the flowers are blowing
     By that streamlet's side,
     And a greener verdure showing
     Where its waters glide,
     Down the hill-slope murmuring on,
     Over root and mossy stone.

     Where yon oak his broad arms flingeth
     O'er the sloping hill,
     Beautiful and freshly springeth
     That soft-flowing rill,
     Through its dark roots wreathed and bare,
     Gushing up to sun and air.

     Brighter waters sparkled never
     In that magic well,
     Of whose gift of life forever
     Ancient legends tell,
     In the lonely desert wasted,
     And by mortal lip untasted.

     Waters which the proud Castilian
     Sought with longing eyes,
     Underneath the bright pavilion
     Of the Indian skies,
     Where his forest pathway lay
     Through the blooms of Florida.

     Years ago a lonely stranger,
     With the dusky brow
     Of the outcast forest-ranger,
     Crossed the swift Powow,
     And betook him to the rill
     And the oak upon the hill.

     O'er his face of moody sadness
     For an instant shone
     Something like a gleam of gladness,
     As he stooped him down
     To the fountain's grassy side,
     And his eager thirst supplied.

     With the oak its shadow throwing
     O'er his mossy seat,
     And the cool, sweet waters flowing
     Softly at his feet,
     Closely by the fountain's rim
     That lone Indian seated him.

     Autumn's earliest frost had given
     To the woods below
     Hues of beauty, such as heaven
     Lendeth to its bow;
     And the soft breeze from the west
     Scarcely broke their dreamy rest.

     Far behind was Ocean striving
     With his chains of sand;
     Southward, sunny glimpses giving,
     'Twixt the swells of land,
     Of its calm and silvery track,
     Rolled the tranquil Merrimac.

     Over village, wood, and meadow
     Gazed that stranger man,
     Sadly, till the twilight shadow
     Over all things ran,
     Save where spire and westward pane
     Flashed the sunset back again.

     Gazing thus upon the dwelling
     Of his warrior sires,
     Where no lingering trace was telling
     Of their wigwam fires,
     Who the gloomy thoughts might know
     Of that wandering child of woe?

     Naked lay, in sunshine glowing,
     Hills that once had stood
     Down their sides the shadows throwing
     Of a mighty wood,
     Where the deer his covert kept,
     And the eagle's pinion swept!

     Where the birch canoe had glided
     Down the swift Powow,
     Dark and gloomy bridges strided
     Those clear waters now;
     And where once the beaver swam,
     Jarred the wheel and frowned the dam.

     For the wood-bird's merry singing,
     And the hunter's cheer,
     Iron clang and hammer's ringing
     Smote upon his ear;
     And the thick and sullen smoke
     From the blackened forges broke.

     Could it be his fathers ever
     Loved to linger here?
     These bare hills, this conquered river,--
     Could they hold them dear,
     With their native loveliness
     Tamed and tortured into this?

     Sadly, as the shades of even
     Gathered o'er the hill,
     While the western half of heaven
     Blushed with sunset still,
     From the fountain's mossy seat
     Turned the Indian's weary feet.

     Year on year hath flown forever,
     But he came no more
     To the hillside on the river
     Where he came before.
     But the villager can tell
     Of that strange man's visit well.

     And the merry children, laden
     With their fruits or flowers,
     Roving boy and laughing maiden,
     In their school-day hours,
     Love the simple tale to tell
     Of the Indian and his well.

     1837




PENTUCKET.

The village of Haverhill, on the Merrimac, called by the Indians
Pentucket, was for nearly seventeen years a frontier town, and during
thirty years endured all the horrors of savage warfare. In the year
1708, a combined body of French and Indians, under the command of De
Chaillons, and Hertel de Rouville, the famous and bloody sacker of
Deerfield, made an attack upon the village, which at that time contained
only thirty houses. Sixteen of the villagers were massacred, and a still
larger number made prisoners. About thirty of the enemy also fell, among
them Hertel de Rouville. The minister of the place, Benjamin Rolfe, was
killed by a shot through his own door. In a paper entitled The Border
War of 1708, published in my collection of Recreations and Miscellanies,
I have given a prose narrative of the surprise of Haverhill.


     How sweetly on the wood-girt town
     The mellow light of sunset shone!
     Each small, bright lake, whose waters still
     Mirror the forest and the hill,
     Reflected from its waveless breast
     The beauty of a cloudless west,
     Glorious as if a glimpse were given
     Within the western gates of heaven,
     Left, by the spirit of the star
     Of sunset's holy hour, ajar!

     Beside the river's tranquil flood
     The dark and low-walled dwellings stood,
     Where many a rood of open land
     Stretched up and down on either hand,
     With corn-leaves waving freshly green
     The thick and blackened stumps between.
     Behind, unbroken, deep and dread,
     The wild, untravelled forest spread,
     Back to those mountains, white and cold,
     Of which the Indian trapper told,
     Upon whose summits never yet
     Was mortal foot in safety set.

     Quiet and calm without a fear,
     Of danger darkly lurking near,
     The weary laborer left his plough,
     The milkmaid carolled by her cow;
     From cottage door and household hearth
     Rose songs of praise, or tones of mirth.

     At length the murmur died away,
     And silence on that village lay.
     --So slept Pompeii, tower and hall,
     Ere the quick earthquake swallowed all,
     Undreaming of the fiery fate
     Which made its dwellings desolate.

     Hours passed away. By moonlight sped
     The Merrimac along his bed.
     Bathed in the pallid lustre, stood
     Dark cottage-wall and rock and wood,
     Silent, beneath that tranquil beam,
     As the hushed grouping of a dream.
     Yet on the still air crept a sound,
     No bark of fox, nor rabbit's bound,
     Nor stir of wings, nor waters flowing,
     Nor leaves in midnight breezes blowing.

     Was that the tread of many feet,
     Which downward from the hillside beat?
     What forms were those which darkly stood
     Just on the margin of the wood?--
     Charred tree-stumps in the moonlight dim,
     Or paling rude, or leafless limb?
     No,--through the trees fierce eyeballs glowed,
     Dark human forms in moonshine showed,
     Wild from their native wilderness,
     With painted limbs and battle-dress.

     A yell the dead might wake to hear
     Swelled on the night air, far and clear;
     Then smote the Indian tomahawk
     On crashing door and shattering lock;

     Then rang the rifle-shot, and then
     The shrill death-scream of stricken men,--
     Sank the red axe in woman's brain,
     And childhood's cry arose in vain.
     Bursting through roof and window came,
     Red, fast, and fierce, the kindled flame,
     And blended fire and moonlight glared
     On still dead men and scalp-knives bared.

     The morning sun looked brightly through
     The river willows, wet with dew.
     No sound of combat filled the air,
     No shout was heard, nor gunshot there;
     Yet still the thick and sullen smoke
     From smouldering ruins slowly broke;
     And on the greensward many a stain,
     And, here and there, the mangled slain,
     Told how that midnight bolt had sped
     Pentucket, on thy fated head.

     Even now the villager can tell
     Where Rolfe beside his hearthstone fell,
     Still show the door of wasting oak,
     Through which the fatal death-shot broke,
     And point the curious stranger where
     De Rouville's corse lay grim and bare;
     Whose hideous head, in death still feared,
     Bore not a trace of hair or beard;
     And still, within the churchyard ground,
     Heaves darkly up the ancient mound,
     Whose grass-grown surface overlies
     The victims of that sacrifice.
     1838.




THE NORSEMEN.

In the early part of the present century, a fragment of a statue, rudely
chiselled from dark gray stone, was found in the town of Bradford, on
the Merrimac. Its origin must be left entirely to conjecture. The fact
that the ancient Northmen visited the north-east coast of North America
and probably New England, some centuries before the discovery of the
western world by Columbus, is very generally admitted.

     GIFT from the cold and silent Past!
     A relic to the present cast,
     Left on the ever-changing strand
     Of shifting and unstable sand,
     Which wastes beneath the steady chime
     And beating of the waves of Time!
     Who from its bed of primal rock
     First wrenched thy dark, unshapely block?
     Whose hand, of curious skill untaught,
     Thy rude and savage outline wrought?

     The waters of my native stream
     Are glancing in the sun's warm beam;
     From sail-urged keel and flashing oar
     The circles widen to its shore;
     And cultured field and peopled town
     Slope to its willowed margin down.
     Yet, while this morning breeze is bringing
     The home-life sound of school-bells ringing,
     And rolling wheel, and rapid jar
     Of the fire-winged and steedless car,
     And voices from the wayside near
     Come quick and blended on my ear,--
     A spell is in this old gray stone,
     My thoughts are with the Past alone!

     A change!--The steepled town no more
     Stretches along the sail-thronged shore;
     Like palace-domes in sunset's cloud,
     Fade sun-gilt spire and mansion proud
     Spectrally rising where they stood,
     I see the old, primeval wood;
     Dark, shadow-like, on either hand
     I see its solemn waste expand;
     It climbs the green and cultured hill,
     It arches o'er the valley's rill,
     And leans from cliff and crag to throw
     Its wild arms o'er the stream below.
     Unchanged, alone, the same bright river
     Flows on, as it will flow forever
     I listen, and I hear the low
     Soft ripple where its waters go;
     I hear behind the panther's cry,
     The wild-bird's scream goes thrilling by,
     And shyly on the river's brink
     The deer is stooping down to drink.

     But hark!--from wood and rock flung back,
     What sound comes up the Merrimac?
     What sea-worn barks are those which throw
     The light spray from each rushing prow?
     Have they not in the North Sea's blast
     Bowed to the waves the straining mast?
     Their frozen sails the low, pale sun
     Of Thule's night has shone upon;
     Flapped by the sea-wind's gusty sweep
     Round icy drift, and headland steep.
     Wild Jutland's wives and Lochlin's daughters
     Have watched them fading o'er the waters,
     Lessening through driving mist and spray,
     Like white-winged sea-birds on their way!

     Onward they glide,--and now I view
     Their iron-armed and stalwart crew;
     Joy glistens in each wild blue eye,
     Turned to green earth and summer sky.
     Each broad, seamed breast has cast aside
     Its cumbering vest of shaggy hide;
     Bared to the sun and soft warm air,
     Streams back the Norsemen's yellow hair.
     I see the gleam of axe and spear,
     The sound of smitten shields I hear,
     Keeping a harsh and fitting time
     To Saga's chant, and Runic rhyme;
     Such lays as Zetland's Scald has sung,
     His gray and naked isles among;
     Or muttered low at midnight hour
     Round Odin's mossy stone of power.
     The wolf beneath the Arctic moon
     Has answered to that startling rune;
     The Gael has heard its stormy swell,
     The light Frank knows its summons well;
     Iona's sable-stoled Culdee
     Has heard it sounding o'er the sea,
     And swept, with hoary beard and hair,
     His altar's foot in trembling prayer.

     'T is past,--the 'wildering vision dies
     In darkness on my dreaming eyes
     The forest vanishes in air,
     Hill-slope and vale lie starkly bare;
     I hear the common tread of men,
     And hum of work-day life again;

     The mystic relic seems alone
     A broken mass of common stone;
     And if it be the chiselled limb
     Of Berserker or idol grim,
     A fragment of Valhalla's Thor,
     The stormy Viking's god of War,
     Or Praga of the Runic lay,
     Or love-awakening Siona,
     I know not,--for no graven line,
     Nor Druid mark, nor Runic sign,
     Is left me here, by which to trace
     Its name, or origin, or place.
     Yet, for this vision of the Past,
     This glance upon its darkness cast,
     My spirit bows in gratitude
     Before the Giver of all good,
     Who fashioned so the human mind,
     That, from the waste of Time behind,
     A simple stone, or mound of earth,
     Can summon the departed forth;
     Quicken the Past to life again,
     The Present lose in what hath been,
     And in their primal freshness show
     The buried forms of long ago.
     As if a portion of that Thought
     By which the Eternal will is wrought,
     Whose impulse fills anew with breath
     The frozen solitude of Death,
     To mortal mind were sometimes lent,
     To mortal musings sometimes sent,
     To whisper-even when it seems
     But Memory's fantasy of dreams--
     Through the mind's waste of woe and sin,
     Of an immortal origin!

     1841.




FUNERAL TREE OF THE SOKOKIS.

Polan, chief of the Sokokis Indians of the country between Agamenticus
and Casco Bay, was killed at Windham on Sebago Lake in the spring of
1756. After the whites had retired, the surviving Indians "swayed" or
bent down a young tree until its roots were upturned, placed the body of
their chief beneath it, then released the tree, which, in springing back
to its old position, covered the grave. The Sokokis were early converts
to the Catholic faith. Most of them, prior to the year 1756, had removed
to the French settlements on the St. Francois.

     AROUND Sebago's lonely lake
     There lingers not a breeze to break
     The mirror which its waters make.

     The solemn pines along its shore,
     The firs which hang its gray rocks o'er,
     Are painted on its glassy floor.

     The sun looks o'er, with hazy eye,
     The snowy mountain-tops which lie
     Piled coldly up against the sky.

     Dazzling and white! save where the bleak,
     Wild winds have bared some splintering peak,
     Or snow-slide left its dusky streak.

     Yet green are Saco's banks below,
     And belts of spruce and cedar show,
     Dark fringing round those cones of snow.

     The earth hath felt the breath of spring,
     Though yet on her deliverer's wing
     The lingering frosts of winter cling.

     Fresh grasses fringe the meadow-brooks,
     And mildly from its sunny nooks
     The blue eye of the violet looks.

     And odors from the springing grass,
     The sweet birch and the sassafras,
     Upon the scarce-felt breezes pass.

     Her tokens of renewing care
     Hath Nature scattered everywhere,
     In bud and flower, and warmer air.

     But in their hour of bitterness,
     What reek the broken Sokokis,
     Beside their slaughtered chief, of this?

     The turf's red stain is yet undried,
     Scarce have the death-shot echoes died
     Along Sebago's wooded side;

     And silent now the hunters stand,
     Grouped darkly, where a swell of land
     Slopes upward from the lake's white sand.

     Fire and the axe have swept it bare,
     Save one lone beech, unclosing there
     Its light leaves in the vernal air.

     With grave, cold looks, all sternly mute,
     They break the damp turf at its foot,
     And bare its coiled and twisted root.

     They heave the stubborn trunk aside,
     The firm roots from the earth divide,--
     The rent beneath yawns dark and wide.

     And there the fallen chief is laid,
     In tasselled garb of skins arrayed,
     And girded with his wampum-braid.

     The silver cross he loved is pressed
     Beneath the heavy arms, which rest
     Upon his scarred and naked breast.

     'T is done: the roots are backward sent,
     The beechen-tree stands up unbent,
     The Indian's fitting monument!

     When of that sleeper's broken race
     Their green and pleasant dwelling-place,
     Which knew them once, retains no trace;

     Oh, long may sunset's light be shed
     As now upon that beech's head,
     A green memorial of the dead!

     There shall his fitting requiem be,
     In northern winds, that, cold and free,
     Howl nightly in that funeral tree.

     To their wild wail the waves which break
     Forever round that lonely lake
     A solemn undertone shall make!

     And who shall deem the spot unblest,
     Where Nature's younger children rest,
     Lulled on their sorrowing mother's breast?

     Deem ye that mother loveth less
     These bronzed forms of the wilderness
     She foldeth in her long caress?

     As sweet o'er them her wild-flowers blow,
     As if with fairer hair and brow
     The blue-eyed Saxon slept below.

     What though the places of their rest
     No priestly knee hath ever pressed,--
     No funeral rite nor prayer hath blessed?

     What though the bigot's ban be there,
     And thoughts of wailing and despair,
     And cursing in the place of prayer.

     Yet Heaven hath angels watching round
     The Indian's lowliest forest-mound,--
     And they have made it holy ground.

     There ceases man's frail judgment; all
     His powerless bolts of cursing fall
     Unheeded on that grassy pall.

     O peeled and hunted and reviled,
     Sleep on, dark tenant of the wild!
     Great Nature owns her simple child!

     And Nature's God, to whom alone
     The secret of the heart is known,--
     The hidden language traced thereon;

     Who from its many cumberings
     Of form and creed, and outward things,
     To light the naked spirit brings;

     Not with our partial eye shall scan,
     Not with our pride and scorn shall ban,
     The spirit of our brother man!
     1841.




ST. JOHN.

The fierce rivalry between Charles de La Tour, a Protestant, and
D'Aulnay Charnasy, a Catholic, for the possession of Acadia, forms one
of the most romantic passages in the history of the New World. La Tour
received aid in several instances from the Puritan colony of
Massachusetts. During one of his voyages for the purpose of obtaining
arms and provisions for his establishment at St. John, his castle was
attacked by D'Aulnay, and successfully defended by its high-spirited
mistress. A second attack however followed in the fourth month, 1647,
when D'Aulnay was successful, and the garrison was put to the sword.
Lady La Tour languished a few days in the hands of her enemy, and then
died of grief.

     "To the winds give our banner!
     Bear homeward again!"
     Cried the Lord of Acadia,
     Cried Charles of Estienne;
     From the prow of his shallop
     He gazed, as the sun,
     From its bed in the ocean,
     Streamed up the St. John.

     O'er the blue western waters
     That shallop had passed,
     Where the mists of Penobscot
     Clung damp on her mast.
     St. Saviour had looked
     On the heretic sail,
     As the songs of the Huguenot
     Rose on the gale.

     The pale, ghostly fathers
     Remembered her well,
     And had cursed her while passing,
     With taper and bell;
     But the men of Monhegan,
     Of Papists abhorred,
     Had welcomed and feasted
     The heretic Lord.

     They had loaded his shallop
     With dun-fish and ball,
     With stores for his larder,
     And steel for his wall.
     Pemaquid, from her bastions
     And turrets of stone,
     Had welcomed his coming
     With banner and gun.

     And the prayers of the elders
     Had followed his way,
     As homeward he glided,
     Down Pentecost Bay.
     Oh, well sped La Tour
     For, in peril and pain,
     His lady kept watch,
     For his coming again.

     O'er the Isle of the Pheasant
     The morning sun shone,
     On the plane-trees which shaded
     The shores of St. John.
     "Now, why from yon battlements
     Speaks not my love!
     Why waves there no banner
     My fortress above?"

     Dark and wild, from his deck
     St. Estienne gazed about,
     On fire-wasted dwellings,
     And silent redoubt;
     From the low, shattered walls
     Which the flame had o'errun,
     There floated no banner,
     There thundered no gun!

     But beneath the low arch
     Of its doorway there stood
     A pale priest of Rome,
     In his cloak and his hood.
     With the bound of a lion,
     La Tour sprang to land,
     On the throat of the Papist
     He fastened his hand.

     "Speak, son of the Woman
     Of scarlet and sin!
     What wolf has been prowling
     My castle within?"
     From the grasp of the soldier
     The Jesuit broke,
     Half in scorn, half in sorrow,
     He smiled as he spoke:

     "No wolf, Lord of Estienne,
     Has ravaged thy hall,
     But thy red-handed rival,
     With fire, steel, and ball!
     On an errand of mercy
     I hitherward came,
     While the walls of thy castle
     Yet spouted with flame.

     "Pentagoet's dark vessels
     Were moored in the bay,
     Grim sea-lions, roaring
     Aloud for their prey."
     "But what of my lady?"
     Cried Charles of Estienne.
     "On the shot-crumbled turret
     Thy lady was seen:

     "Half-veiled in the smoke-cloud,
     Her hand grasped thy pennon,
     While her dark tresses swayed
     In the hot breath of cannon!
     But woe to the heretic,
     Evermore woe!
     When the son of the church
     And the cross is his foe!

     "In the track of the shell,
     In the path of the ball,
     Pentagoet swept over
     The breach of the wall!
     Steel to steel, gun to gun,
     One moment,--and then
     Alone stood the victor,
     Alone with his men!

     "Of its sturdy defenders,
     Thy lady alone
     Saw the cross-blazoned banner
     Float over St. John."
     "Let the dastard look to it!"
     Cried fiery Estienne,
     "Were D'Aulnay King Louis,
     I'd free her again!"

     "Alas for thy lady!
     No service from thee
     Is needed by her
     Whom the Lord hath set free;
     Nine days, in stern silence,
     Her thraldom she bore,
     But the tenth morning came,
     And Death opened her door!"

     As if suddenly smitten
     La Tour staggered back;
     His hand grasped his sword-hilt,
     His forehead grew black.
     He sprang on the deck
     Of his shallop again.
     "We cruise now for vengeance!
     Give way!" cried Estienne.

     "Massachusetts shall hear
     Of the Huguenot's wrong,
     And from island and creekside
     Her fishers shall throng!
     Pentagoet shall rue
     What his Papists have done,
     When his palisades echo
     The Puritan's gun!"

     Oh, the loveliest of heavens
     Hung tenderly o'er him,
     There were waves in the sunshine,
     And green isles before him:
     But a pale hand was beckoning
     The Huguenot on;
     And in blackness and ashes
     Behind was St. John!

     1841




THE CYPRESS-TREE OF CEYLON.

Ibn Batuta, the celebrated Mussulman traveller of the fourteenth
century, speaks of a cypress-tree in Ceylon, universally held sacred by
the natives, the leaves of which were said to fall only at certain
intervals, and he who had the happiness to find and eat one of them was
restored, at once, to youth and vigor. The traveller saw several
venerable Jogees, or saints, sitting silent and motionless under the
tree, patiently awaiting the falling of a leaf.

     THEY sat in silent watchfulness
     The sacred cypress-tree about,
     And, from beneath old wrinkled brows,
     Their failing eyes looked out.

     Gray Age and Sickness waiting there
     Through weary night and lingering day,--
     Grim as the idols at their side,
     And motionless as they.

     Unheeded in the boughs above
     The song of Ceylon's birds was sweet;
     Unseen of them the island flowers
     Bloomed brightly at their feet.

     O'er them the tropic night-storm swept,
     The thunder crashed on rock and hill;
     The cloud-fire on their eyeballs blazed,
     Yet there they waited still!

     What was the world without to them?
     The Moslem's sunset-call, the dance
     Of Ceylon's maids, the passing gleam
     Of battle-flag and lance?

     They waited for that falling leaf
     Of which the wandering Jogees sing:
     Which lends once more to wintry age
     The greenness of its spring.

     Oh, if these poor and blinded ones
     In trustful patience wait to feel
     O'er torpid pulse and failing limb
     A youthful freshness steal;

     Shall we, who sit beneath that Tree
     Whose healing leaves of life are shed,
     In answer to the breath of prayer,
     Upon the waiting head;

     Not to restore our failing forms,
     And build the spirit's broken shrine,
     But on the fainting soul to shed
     A light and life divine--

     Shall we grow weary in our watch,
     And murmur at the long delay?
     Impatient of our Father's time
     And His appointed way?

     Or shall the stir of outward things
     Allure and claim the Christian's eye,
     When on the heathen watcher's ear
     Their powerless murmurs die?

     Alas! a deeper test of faith
     Than prison cell or martyr's stake,
     The self-abasing watchfulness
     Of silent prayer may make.

     We gird us bravely to rebuke
     Our erring brother in the wrong,--
     And in the ear of Pride and Power
     Our warning voice is strong.

     Easier to smite with Peter's sword
     Than "watch one hour" in humbling prayer.
     Life's "great things," like the Syrian lord,
     Our hearts can do and dare.

     But oh! we shrink from Jordan's side,
     From waters which alone can save;

     And murmur for Abana's banks
     And Pharpar's brighter wave.

     O Thou, who in the garden's shade
     Didst wake Thy weary ones again,
     Who slumbered at that fearful hour
     Forgetful of Thy pain;

     Bend o'er us now, as over them,
     And set our sleep-bound spirits free,
     Nor leave us slumbering in the watch
     Our souls should keep with Thee!

     1841




THE EXILES.

The incidents upon which the following ballad has its foundation
about the year 1660. Thomas Macy was one of the first, if not the first
white settler of Nantucket. The career of Macy is briefly but carefully
outlined in James S. Pike's The New Puritan.

     THE goodman sat beside his door
     One sultry afternoon,
     With his young wife singing at his side
     An old and goodly tune.

     A glimmer of heat was in the air,--
     The dark green woods were still;
     And the skirts of a heavy thunder-cloud
     Hung over the western hill.

     Black, thick, and vast arose that cloud
     Above the wilderness,

     As some dark world from upper air
     Were stooping over this.

     At times the solemn thunder pealed,
     And all was still again,
     Save a low murmur in the air
     Of coming wind and rain.

     Just as the first big rain-drop fell,
     A weary stranger came,
     And stood before the farmer's door,
     With travel soiled and lame.

     Sad seemed he, yet sustaining hope
     Was in his quiet glance,
     And peace, like autumn's moonlight, clothed
     His tranquil countenance,--

     A look, like that his Master wore
     In Pilate's council-hall:
     It told of wrongs, but of a love
     Meekly forgiving all.

     "Friend! wilt thou give me shelter here?"
     The stranger meekly said;
     And, leaning on his oaken staff,
     The goodman's features read.

     "My life is hunted,--evil men
     Are following in my track;
     The traces of the torturer's whip
     Are on my aged back;

     "And much, I fear, 't will peril thee
     Within thy doors to take
     A hunted seeker of the Truth,
     Oppressed for conscience' sake."

     Oh, kindly spoke the goodman's wife,
     "Come in, old man!" quoth she,
     "We will not leave thee to the storm,
     Whoever thou mayst be."

     Then came the aged wanderer in,
     And silent sat him down;
     While all within grew dark as night
     Beneath the storm-cloud's frown.

     But while the sudden lightning's blaze
     Filled every cottage nook,
     And with the jarring thunder-roll
     The loosened casements shook,

     A heavy tramp of horses' feet
     Came sounding up the lane,
     And half a score of horse, or more,
     Came plunging through the rain.

     "Now, Goodman Macy, ope thy door,--
     We would not be house-breakers;
     A rueful deed thou'st done this day,
     In harboring banished Quakers."

     Out looked the cautious goodman then,
     With much of fear and awe,
     For there, with broad wig drenched with rain
     The parish priest he saw.

     Open thy door, thou wicked man,
     And let thy pastor in,
     And give God thanks, if forty stripes
     Repay thy deadly sin."

     "What seek ye?" quoth the goodman;
     "The stranger is my guest;
     He is worn with toil and grievous wrong,--
     Pray let the old man rest."

     "Now, out upon thee, canting knave!"
     And strong hands shook the door.
     "Believe me, Macy," quoth the priest,
     "Thou 'lt rue thy conduct sore."

     Then kindled Macy's eye of fire
     "No priest who walks the earth,
     Shall pluck away the stranger-guest
     Made welcome to my hearth."

     Down from his cottage wall he caught
     The matchlock, hotly tried
     At Preston-pans and Marston-moor,
     By fiery Ireton's side;

     Where Puritan, and Cavalier,
     With shout and psalm contended;
     And Rupert's oath, and Cromwell's prayer,
     With battle-thunder blended.

     Up rose the ancient stranger then
     "My spirit is not free
     To bring the wrath and violence
     Of evil men on thee;

     "And for thyself, I pray forbear,
     Bethink thee of thy Lord,
     Who healed again the smitten ear,
     And sheathed His follower's sword.

     "I go, as to the slaughter led.
     Friends of the poor, farewell!"
     Beneath his hand the oaken door
     Back on its hinges fell.

     "Come forth, old graybeard, yea and nay,"
     The reckless scoffers cried,
     As to a horseman's saddle-bow
     The old man's arms were tied.

     And of his bondage hard and long
     In Boston's crowded jail,
     Where suffering woman's prayer was heard,
     With sickening childhood's wail,

     It suits not with our tale to tell;
     Those scenes have passed away;
     Let the dim shadows of the past
     Brood o'er that evil day.

     "Ho, sheriff!" quoth the ardent priest,
     "Take Goodman Macy too;
     The sin of this day's heresy
     His back or purse shall rue."

     "Now, goodwife, haste thee!" Macy cried.
     She caught his manly arm;
     Behind, the parson urged pursuit,
     With outcry and alarm.

     Ho! speed the Macys, neck or naught,--
     The river-course was near;
     The plashing on its pebbled shore
     Was music to their ear.

     A gray rock, tasselled o'er with birch,
     Above the waters hung,
     And at its base, with every wave,
     A small light wherry swung.

     A leap--they gain the boat--and there
     The goodman wields his oar;
     "Ill luck betide them all," he cried,
     "The laggards on the shore."

     Down through the crashing underwood,
     The burly sheriff came:--
     "Stand, Goodman Macy, yield thyself;
     Yield in the King's own name."

     "Now out upon thy hangman's face!"
     Bold Macy answered then,--
     "Whip women, on the village green,
     But meddle not with men."

     The priest came panting to the shore,
     His grave cocked hat was gone;
     Behind him, like some owl's nest, hung
     His wig upon a thorn.

     "Come back,--come back!" the parson cried,
     "The church's curse beware."
     "Curse, an' thou wilt," said Macy, "but
     Thy blessing prithee spare."

     "Vile scoffer!" cried the baffled priest,
     "Thou 'lt yet the gallows see."
     "Who's born to be hanged will not be drowned,"
     Quoth Macy, merrily;

     "And so, sir sheriff and priest, good-by!"
     He bent him to his oar,
     And the small boat glided quietly
     From the twain upon the shore.

     Now in the west, the heavy clouds
     Scattered and fell asunder,
     While feebler came the rush of rain,
     And fainter growled the thunder.

     And through the broken clouds, the sun
     Looked out serene and warm,
     Painting its holy symbol-light
     Upon the passing storm.

     Oh, beautiful! that rainbow span,
     O'er dim Crane-neck was bended;
     One bright foot touched the eastern hills,
     And one with ocean blended.

     By green Pentucket's southern'slope
     The small boat glided fast;
     The watchers of the Block-house saw
     The strangers as they passed.

     That night a stalwart garrison
     Sat shaking in their shoes,
     To hear the dip of Indian oars,
     The glide of birch canoes.

     The fisher-wives of Salisbury--
     The men were all away--
     Looked out to see the stranger oar
     Upon their waters play.

     Deer-Island's rocks and fir-trees threw
     Their sunset-shadows o'er them,
     And Newbury's spire and weathercock
     Peered o'er the pines before them.

     Around the Black Rocks, on their left,
     The marsh lay broad and green;
     And on their right, with dwarf shrubs crowned,
     Plum Island's hills were seen.

     With skilful hand and wary eye
     The harbor-bar was crossed;
     A plaything of the restless wave,
     The boat on ocean tossed.

     The glory of the sunset heaven
     On land and water lay;
     On the steep hills of Agawam,
     On cape, and bluff, and bay.

     They passed the gray rocks of Cape Ann,
     And Gloucester's harbor-bar;
     The watch-fire of the garrison
     Shone like a setting star.

     How brightly broke the morning
     On Massachusetts Bay!
     Blue wave, and bright green island,
     Rejoicing in the day.

     On passed the bark in safety
     Round isle and headland steep;
     No tempest broke above them,
     No fog-cloud veiled the deep.

     Far round the bleak and stormy Cape
     The venturous Macy passed,
     And on Nantucket's naked isle
     Drew up his boat at last.

     And how, in log-built cabin,
     They braved the rough sea-weather;
     And there, in peace and quietness,
     Went down life's vale together;

     How others drew around them,
     And how their fishing sped,
     Until to every wind of heaven
     Nantucket's sails were spread;

     How pale Want alternated
     With Plenty's golden smile;
     Behold, is it not written
     In the annals of the isle?

     And yet that isle remaineth
     A refuge of the free,
     As when true-hearted Macy
     Beheld it from the sea.

     Free as the winds that winnow
     Her shrubless hills of sand,
     Free as the waves that batter
     Along her yielding land.

     Than hers, at duty's summons,
     No loftier spirit stirs,
     Nor falls o'er human suffering
     A readier tear then hers.

     God bless the sea-beat island!
     And grant forevermore,
     That charity and freedom dwell
     As now upon her shore!

     1841.




THE KNIGHT OF ST. JOHN.

     ERE down yon blue Carpathian hills
     The sun shall sink again,
     Farewell to life and all its ills,
     Farewell to cell and chain!

     These prison shades are dark and cold,
     But, darker far than they,
     The shadow of a sorrow old
     Is on my heart alway.

     For since the day when Warkworth wood
     Closed o'er my steed, and I,
     An alien from my name and blood,
     A weed cast out to die,--

     When, looking back in sunset light,
     I saw her turret gleam,
     And from its casement, far and white,
     Her sign of farewell stream,

     Like one who, from some desert shore,
     Doth home's green isles descry,
     And, vainly longing, gazes o'er
     The waste of wave and sky;

     So from the desert of my fate
     I gaze across the past;
     Forever on life's dial-plate
     The shade is backward cast!

     I've wandered wide from shore to shore,
     I've knelt at many a shrine;
     And bowed me to the rocky floor
     Where Bethlehem's tapers shine;

     And by the Holy Sepulchre
     I've pledged my knightly sword
     To Christ, His blessed Church, and her,
     The Mother of our Lord.

     Oh, vain the vow, and vain the strife!
     How vain do all things seem!
     My soul is in the past, and life
     To-day is but a dream.

     In vain the penance strange and long,
     And hard for flesh to bear;
     The prayer, the fasting, and the thong,
     And sackcloth shirt of hair.

     The eyes of memory will not sleep,
     Its ears are open still;
     And vigils with the past they keep
     Against my feeble will.

     And still the loves and joys of old
     Do evermore uprise;
     I see the flow of locks of gold,
     The shine of loving eyes!

     Ah me! upon another's breast
     Those golden locks recline;
     I see upon another rest
     The glance that once was mine.

     "O faithless priest!  O perjured knight!"
     I hear the Master cry;
     "Shut out the vision from thy sight,
     Let Earth and Nature die.

     "The Church of God is now thy spouse,
     And thou the bridegroom art;
     Then let the burden of thy vows
     Crush down thy human heart!"

     In vain! This heart its grief must know,
     Till life itself hath ceased,
     And falls beneath the self-same blow
     The lover and the priest!

     O pitying Mother! souls of light,
     And saints and martyrs old!
     Pray for a weak and sinful knight,
     A suffering man uphold.

     Then let the Paynim work his will,
     And death unbind my chain,
     Ere down yon blue Carpathian hill
     The sun shall fall again.

     1843




CASSANDRA SOUTHWICK.

In 1658 two young persons, son and daughter of Lawrence Smithwick of
Salem, who had himself been imprisoned and deprived of nearly all his
property for having entertained Quakers at his house, were fined for
non-attendance at church. They being unable to pay the fine, the General
Court issued an order empowering "the Treasurer of the County to sell
the said persons to any of the English nation of Virginia or Barbadoes,
to answer said fines." An attempt was made to carry this order into
execution, but no shipmaster was found willing to convey them to the
West Indies.

     To the God of all sure mercies let my blessing rise
     to-day,
     From the scoffer and the cruel He hath plucked
     the spoil away;
     Yea, He who cooled the furnace around the faithful
     three,
     And tamed the Chaldean lions, hath set His hand-
     maid free!
     Last night I saw the sunset melt through my prison
     bars,
     Last night across my damp earth-floor fell the pale
     gleam of stars;
     In the coldness and the darkness all through the
     long night-time,
     My grated casement whitened with autumn's early
     rime.
     Alone, in that dark sorrow, hour after hour crept
     by;
     Star after star looked palely in and sank adown
     the sky;
     No sound amid night's stillness, save that which
     seemed to be
     The dull and heavy beating of the pulses of the sea;

     All night I sat unsleeping, for I knew that on the
     morrow
     The ruler and the cruel priest would mock me in
     my sorrow,
     Dragged to their place of market, and bargained
     for and sold,
     Like a lamb before the shambles, like a heifer
     from the fold!

     Oh, the weakness of the flesh was there, the
     shrinking and the shame;
     And the low voice of the Tempter like whispers to
     me came:
     "Why sit'st thou thus forlornly," the wicked
     murmur said,
     "Damp walls thy bower of beauty, cold earth thy
     maiden bed?

     "Where be the smiling faces, and voices soft and
     sweet,
     Seen in thy father's dwelling, heard in the pleasant
     street?
     Where be the youths whose glances, the summer
     Sabbath through,
     Turned tenderly and timidly unto thy father's pew?


     "Why sit'st thou here, Cassandra?-Bethink
     thee with what mirth
     Thy happy schoolmates gather around the warm
     bright hearth;
     How the crimson shadows tremble on foreheads
     white and fair,
     On eyes of merry girlhood, half hid in golden hair.

     "Not for thee the hearth-fire brightens, not for
     thee kind words are spoken,
     Not for thee the nuts of Wenham woods by laughing
     boys are broken;
     No first-fruits of the orchard within thy lap are
     laid,
     For thee no flowers of autumn the youthful hunters
     braid.

     "O weak, deluded maiden!--by crazy fancies
     led,
     With wild and raving railers an evil path to tread;
     To leave a wholesome worship, and teaching pure
     and sound,
     And mate with maniac women, loose-haired and
     sackcloth bound,--

     "Mad scoffers of the priesthood; who mock at
     things divine,
     Who rail against the pulpit, and holy bread and
     wine;
     Sore from their cart-tail scourgings, and from the
     pillory lame,
     Rejoicing in their wretchedness, and glorying in
     their shame.

     "And what a fate awaits thee!--a sadly toiling
     slave,
     Dragging the slowly lengthening chain of bondage
     to the grave!
     Think of thy woman's nature, subdued in hopeless
     thrall,
     The easy prey of any, the scoff and scorn of all!"

     Oh, ever as the Tempter spoke, and feeble Nature's
     fears
     Wrung drop by drop the scalding flow of unavailing
     tears,
     I wrestled down the evil thoughts, and strove in
     silent prayer,
     To feel, O Helper of the weak! that Thou indeed
     wert there!

     I thought of Paul and Silas, within Philippi's cell,
     And how from Peter's sleeping limbs the prison
     shackles fell,
     Till I seemed to hear the trailing of an angel's
     robe of white,
     And to feel a blessed presence invisible to sight.

     Bless the Lord for all his mercies!--for the peace
     and love I felt,
     Like dew of Hermon's holy hill, upon my spirit
     melt;
     When "Get behind me, Satan!" was the language
     of my heart,
     And I felt the Evil Tempter with all his doubts
     depart.

     Slow broke the gray cold morning; again the sunshine
     fell,
     Flecked with the shade of bar and grate within
     my lonely cell;
     The hoar-frost melted on the wall, and upward
     from the street
     Came careless laugh and idle word, and tread of
     passing feet.

     At length the heavy bolts fell back, my door was
     open cast,
     And slowly at the sheriff's side, up the long street
     I passed;
     I heard the murmur round me, and felt, but dared
     not see,
     How, from every door and window, the people
     gazed on me.

     And doubt and fear fell on me, shame burned upon
     my cheek,
     Swam earth and sky around me, my trembling
     limbs grew weak:
     "O Lord! support thy handmaid; and from her
     soul cast out
     The fear of man, which brings a snare, the weakness
     and the doubt."

     Then the dreary shadows scattered, like a cloud in
     morning's breeze,
     And a low deep voice within me seemed whispering
     words like these:
     "Though thy earth be as the iron, and thy heaven
     a brazen wall,
     Trust still His loving-kindness whose power is over
     all."

     We paused at length, where at my feet the sunlit
     waters broke
     On glaring reach of shining beach, and shingly
     wall of rock;
     The merchant-ships lay idly there, in hard clear
     lines on high,
     Tracing with rope and slender spar their network
     on the sky.

     And there were ancient citizens, cloak-wrapped
     and grave and cold,
     And grim and stout sea-captains with faces bronzed
     and old,
     And on his horse, with Rawson, his cruel clerk at
     hand,
     Sat dark and haughty Endicott, the ruler of the
     land.

     And poisoning with his evil words the ruler's ready
     ear,
     The priest leaned o'er his saddle, with laugh and
     scoff and jeer;
     It stirred my soul, and from my lips the seal of
     silence broke,
     As if through woman's weakness a warning spirit
     spoke.

     I cried, "The Lord rebuke thee, thou smiter of the
     meek,
     Thou robber of the righteous, thou trampler of
     the weak!
     Go light the dark, cold hearth-stones,--go turn
     the prison lock
     Of the poor hearts thou hast hunted, thou wolf
     amid the flock!"

     Dark lowered the brows of Endicott, and with a
     deeper red
     O'er Rawson's wine-empurpled cheek the flush of
     anger spread;
     "Good people," quoth the white-lipped priest,
     "heed not her words so wild,
     Her Master speaks within her,--the Devil owns
     his child!"

     But gray heads shook, and young brows knit, the
     while the sheriff read
     That law the wicked rulers against the poor have
     made,
     Who to their house of Rimmon and idol priesthood
     bring
     No bended knee of worship, nor gainful offering.

     Then to the stout sea-captains the sheriff, turning,
     said,--
     "Which of ye, worthy seamen, will take this
     Quaker maid?
     In the Isle of fair Barbadoes, or on Virginia's
     shore,
     You may hold her at a higher price than Indian
     girl or Moor."

     Grim and silent stood the captains; and when
     again he cried,
     "Speak out, my worthy seamen!"--no voice, no
     sign replied;
     But I felt a hard hand press my own, and kind
     words met my ear,--
     "God bless thee, and preserve thee, my gentle girl
     and dear!"

     A weight seemed lifted from my heart, a pitying
     friend was nigh,--
     I felt it in his hard, rough hand, and saw it in his
     eye;
     And when again the sheriff spoke, that voice, so
     kind to me,
     Growled back its stormy answer like the roaring
     of the sea,--

     "Pile my ship with bars of silver, pack with coins
     of Spanish gold,
     From keel-piece up to deck-plank, the roomage of
     her hold,
     By the living God who made me!--I would sooner
     in your bay
     Sink ship and crew and cargo, than bear this child
     away!"

     "Well answered, worthy captain, shame on their
     cruel laws!"
     Ran through the crowd in murmurs loud the people's
     just applause.
     "Like the herdsman of Tekoa, in Israel of old,
     Shall we see the poor and righteous again for
     silver sold?"

     I looked on haughty Endicott; with weapon half-
     way drawn,
     Swept round the throng his lion glare of bitter hate
     and scorn;
     Fiercely he drew his bridle-rein, and turned in
     silence back,
     And sneering priest and baffled clerk rode
     murmuring in his track.

     Hard after them the sheriff looked, in bitterness of
     soul;
     Thrice smote his staff upon the ground, and
     crushed his parchment roll.
     "Good friends," he said, "since both have fled,
     the ruler and the priest,
     Judge ye, if from their further work I be not well
     released."

     Loud was the cheer which, full and clear, swept
     round the silent bay,
     As, with kind words and kinder looks, he bade me
     go my way;
     For He who turns the courses of the streamlet of
     the glen,
     And the river of great waters, had turned the
     hearts of men.

     Oh, at that hour the very earth seemed changed
     beneath my eye,
     A holier wonder round me rose the blue walls of
     the sky,
     A lovelier light on rock and hill and stream and
     woodland lay,
     And softer lapsed on sunnier sands the waters of
     the bay.

     Thanksgiving to the Lord of life! to Him all
     praises be,
     Who from the hands of evil men hath set his hand-
     maid free;
     All praise to Him before whose power the mighty
     are afraid,
     Who takes the crafty in the snare which for the
     poor is laid!

     Sing, O my soul, rejoicingly, on evening's twilight
     calm
     Uplift the loud thanksgiving, pour forth the grateful
     psalm;
     Let all dear hearts with me rejoice, as did the
     saints of old,
     When of the Lord's good angel the rescued Peter
     told.

     And weep and howl, ye evil priests and mighty
     men of wrong,
     The Lord shall smite the proud, and lay His hand
     upon the strong.
     Woe to the wicked rulers in His avenging hour!
     Woe to the wolves who seek the flocks to raven
     and devour!

     But let the humble ones arise, the poor in heart
     be glad,
     And let the mourning ones again with robes of
     praise be clad.
     For He who cooled the furnace, and smoothed the
     stormy wave,
     And tamed the Chaldean lions, is mighty still to
     save!

     1843.




THE NEW WIFE AND THE OLD.

The following ballad is founded upon one of the marvellous legends
connected with the famous General ----, of Hampton, New Hampshire,
who was regarded by his neighbors as a Yankee Faust, in league with
the adversary. I give the story, as I heard it when a child, from a
venerable family visitant.


     DARK the halls, and cold the feast,
     Gone the bridemaids, gone the priest.
     All is over, all is done,
     Twain of yesterday are one!
     Blooming girl and manhood gray,
     Autumn in the arms of May!

     Hushed within and hushed without,
     Dancing feet and wrestlers' shout;
     Dies the bonfire on the hill;
     All is dark and all is still,
     Save the starlight, save the breeze
     Moaning through the graveyard trees,
     And the great sea-waves below,
     Pulse of the midnight beating slow.

     From the brief dream of a bride
     She hath wakened, at his side.
     With half-uttered shriek and start,--
     Feels she not his beating heart?
     And the pressure of his arm,
     And his breathing near and warm?

     Lightly from the bridal bed
     Springs that fair dishevelled head,
     And a feeling, new, intense,
     Half of shame, half innocence,
     Maiden fear and wonder speaks
     Through her lips and changing cheeks.

     From the oaken mantel glowing,
     Faintest light the lamp is throwing
     On the mirror's antique mould,
     High-backed chair, and wainscot old,
     And, through faded curtains stealing,
     His dark sleeping face revealing.

     Listless lies the strong man there,
     Silver-streaked his careless hair;
     Lips of love have left no trace
     On that hard and haughty face;
     And that forehead's knitted thought
     Love's soft hand hath not unwrought.

     "Yet," she sighs, "he loves me well,
     More than these calm lips will tell.
     Stooping to my lowly state,
     He hath made me rich and great,
     And I bless him, though he be
     Hard and stern to all save me!"

     While she speaketh, falls the light
     O'er her fingers small and white;
     Gold and gem, and costly ring
     Back the timid lustre fling,--
     Love's selectest gifts, and rare,
     His proud hand had fastened there.

     Gratefully she marks the glow
     From those tapering lines of snow;
     Fondly o'er the sleeper bending
     His black hair with golden blending,
     In her soft and light caress,
     Cheek and lip together press.

     Ha!--that start of horror! why
     That wild stare and wilder cry,
     Full of terror, full of pain?
     Is there madness in her brain?
     Hark! that gasping, hoarse and low,
     "Spare me,--spare me,--let me go!"

     God have mercy!--icy cold
     Spectral hands her own enfold,
     Drawing silently from them
     Love's fair gifts of gold and gem.
     "Waken! save me!" still as death
     At her side he slumbereth.

     Ring and bracelet all are gone,
     And that ice-cold hand withdrawn;
     But she hears a murmur low,
     Full of sweetness, full of woe,
     Half a sigh and half a moan
     "Fear not! give the dead her own!"

     Ah!--the dead wife's voice she knows!
     That cold hand whose pressure froze,
     Once in warmest life had borne
     Gem and band her own hath worn.
     "Wake thee! wake thee!" Lo, his eyes
     Open with a dull surprise.

     In his arms the strong man folds her,
     Closer to his breast he holds her;
     Trembling limbs his own are meeting,
     And he feels her heart's quick beating
     "Nay, my dearest, why this fear?"
     "Hush!" she saith, "the dead is here!"

     "Nay, a dream,--an idle dream."
     But before the lamp's pale gleam
     Tremblingly her hand she raises.
     There no more the diamond blazes,
     Clasp of pearl, or ring of gold,--
     "Ah!" she sighs, "her hand was cold!"

     Broken words of cheer he saith,
     But his dark lip quivereth,
     And as o'er the past he thinketh,
     From his young wife's arms he shrinketh;
     Can those soft arms round him lie,
     Underneath his dead wife's eye?

     She her fair young head can rest
     Soothed and childlike on his breast,
     And in trustful innocence
     Draw new strength and courage thence;
     He, the proud man, feels within
     But the cowardice of sin!

     She can murmur in her thought
     Simple prayers her mother taught,
     And His blessed angels call,
     Whose great love is over all;
     He, alone, in prayerless pride,
     Meets the dark Past at her side!

     One, who living shrank with dread
     From his look, or word, or tread,
     Unto whom her early grave
     Was as freedom to the slave,
     Moves him at this midnight hour,
     With the dead's unconscious power!

     Ah, the dead, the unforgot!
     From their solemn homes of thought,
     Where the cypress shadows blend
     Darkly over foe and friend,
     Or in love or sad rebuke,
     Back upon the living look.

     And the tenderest ones and weakest,
     Who their wrongs have borne the meekest,
     Lifting from those dark, still places,
     Sweet and sad-remembered faces,
     O'er the guilty hearts behind
     An unwitting triumph find.

     1843




THE BRIDAL OF PENNACOOK.

Winnepurkit, otherwise called George, Sachem of Saugus, married a
daughter of Passaconaway, the great Pennacook chieftain, in 1662. The
wedding took place at Pennacook (now Concord, N. H.), and the ceremonies
closed with a great feast. According to the usages of the chiefs,
Passaconaway ordered a select number of his men to accompany the
newly-married couple to the dwelling of the husband, where in turn there
was another great feast. Some time after, the wife of Winnepurkit
expressing a desire to visit her father's house was permitted to go,
accompanied by a brave escort of her husband's chief men. But when she
wished to return, her father sent a messenger to Saugus, informing her
husband, and asking him to come and take her away. He returned for
answer that he had escorted his wife to her father's house in a style
that became a chief, and that now if she wished to return, her father
must send her back, in the same way. This Passaconaway refused to do,
and it is said that here terminated the connection of his daughter with
the Saugus chief.--Vide MORTON'S New Canaan.


     WE had been wandering for many days
     Through the rough northern country. We had seen
     The sunset, with its bars of purple cloud,
     Like a new heaven, shine upward from the lake
     Of Winnepiseogee; and had felt
     The sunrise breezes, midst the leafy isles
     Which stoop their summer beauty to the lips
     Of the bright waters. We had checked our steeds,
     Silent with wonder, where the mountain wall
     Is piled to heaven; and, through the narrow rift
     Of the vast rocks, against whose rugged feet
     Beats the mad torrent with perpetual roar,
     Where noonday is as twilight, and the wind
     Comes burdened with the everlasting moan
     Of forests and of far-off waterfalls,
     We had looked upward where the summer sky,
     Tasselled with clouds light-woven by the sun,
     Sprung its blue arch above the abutting crags
     O'er-roofing the vast portal of the land
     Beyond the wall of mountains. We had passed
     The high source of the Saco; and bewildered
     In the dwarf spruce-belts of the Crystal Hills,
     Had heard above us, like a voice in the cloud,
     The horn of Fabyan sounding; and atop
     Of old Agioochook had seen the mountains'
     Piled to the northward, shagged with wood, and thick
     As meadow mole-hills,--the far sea of Casco,
     A white gleam on the horizon of the east;
     Fair lakes, embosomed in the woods and hills;
     Moosehillock's mountain range, and Kearsarge
     Lifting his granite forehead to the sun!

     And we had rested underneath the oaks
     Shadowing the bank, whose grassy spires are shaken
     By the perpetual beating of the falls
     Of the wild Ammonoosuc. We had tracked
     The winding Pemigewasset, overhung
     By beechen shadows, whitening down its rocks,
     Or lazily gliding through its intervals,
     From waving rye-fields sending up the gleam
     Of sunlit waters. We had seen the moon
     Rising behind Umbagog's eastern pines,
     Like a great Indian camp-fire; and its beams
     At midnight spanning with a bridge of silver
     The Merrimac by Uncanoonuc's falls.

     There were five souls of us whom travel's chance
     Had thrown together in these wild north hills
     A city lawyer, for a month escaping
     From his dull office, where the weary eye
     Saw only hot brick walls and close thronged streets;
     Briefless as yet, but with an eye to see
     Life's sunniest side, and with a heart to take
     Its chances all as godsends; and his brother,
     Pale from long pulpit studies, yet retaining
     The warmth and freshness of a genial heart,
     Whose mirror of the beautiful and true,
     In Man and Nature, was as yet undimmed
     By dust of theologic strife, or breath
     Of sect, or cobwebs of scholastic lore;
     Like a clear crystal calm of water, taking
     The hue and image of o'erleaning flowers,
     Sweet human faces, white clouds of the noon,
     Slant starlight glimpses through the dewy leaves,
     And tenderest moonrise. 'T was, in truth, a study,
     To mark his spirit, alternating between
     A decent and professional gravity
     And an irreverent mirthfulness, which often
     Laughed in the face of his divinity,
     Plucked off the sacred ephod, quite unshrined
     The oracle, and for the pattern priest
     Left us the man. A shrewd, sagacious merchant,
     To whom the soiled sheet found in Crawford's inn,
     Giving the latest news of city stocks
     And sales of cotton, had a deeper meaning
     Than the great presence of the awful mountains
     Glorified by the sunset; and his daughter,
     A delicate flower on whom had blown too long
     Those evil winds, which, sweeping from the ice
     And winnowing the fogs of Labrador,
     Shed their cold blight round Massachusetts Bay,
     With the same breath which stirs Spring's opening leaves
     And lifts her half-formed flower-bell on its stem,
     Poisoning our seaside atmosphere.

     It chanced that as we turned upon our homeward way,
     A drear northeastern storm came howling up
     The valley of the Saco; and that girl
     Who had stood with us upon Mount Washington,
     Her brown locks ruffled by the wind which whirled
     In gusts around its sharp, cold pinnacle,
     Who had joined our gay trout-fishing in the streams
     Which lave that giant's feet; whose laugh was heard
     Like a bird's carol on the sunrise breeze
     Which swelled our sail amidst the lake's green islands,
     Shrank from its harsh, chill breath, and visibly drooped
     Like a flower in the frost. So, in that quiet inn
     Which looks from Conway on the mountains piled
     Heavily against the horizon of the north,
     Like summer thunder-clouds, we made our home
     And while the mist hung over dripping hills,
     And the cold wind-driven rain-drops all day long
     Beat their sad music upon roof and pane,
     We strove to cheer our gentle invalid.

     The lawyer in the pauses of the storm
     Went angling down the Saco, and, returning,
     Recounted his adventures and mishaps;
     Gave us the history of his scaly clients,
     Mingling with ludicrous yet apt citations
     Of barbarous law Latin, passages
     From Izaak Walton's Angler, sweet and fresh
     As the flower-skirted streams of Staffordshire,
     Where, under aged trees, the southwest wind
     Of soft June mornings fanned the thin, white hair
     Of the sage fisher. And, if truth be told,
     Our youthful candidate forsook his sermons,
     His commentaries, articles and creeds,
     For the fair page of human loveliness,
     The missal of young hearts, whose sacred text
     Is music, its illumining, sweet smiles.
     He sang the songs she loved; and in his low,
     Deep, earnest voice, recited many a page
     Of poetry, the holiest, tenderest lines
     Of the sad bard of Olney, the sweet songs,
     Simple and beautiful as Truth and Nature,
     Of him whose whitened locks on Rydal Mount
     Are lifted yet by morning breezes blowing
     From the green hills, immortal in his lays.
     And for myself, obedient to her wish,
     I searched our landlord's proffered library,--
     A well-thumbed Bunyan, with its nice wood pictures
     Of scaly fiends and angels not unlike them;
     Watts' unmelodious psalms; Astrology's
     Last home, a musty pile of almanacs,
     And an old chronicle of border wars
     And Indian history. And, as I read
     A story of the marriage of the Chief
     Of Saugus to the dusky Weetamoo,
     Daughter of Passaconaway, who dwelt
     In the old time upon the Merrimac,
     Our fair one, in the playful exercise
     Of her prerogative,--the right divine
     Of youth and beauty,--bade us versify
     The legend, and with ready pencil sketched
     Its plan and outlines, laughingly assigning
     To each his part, and barring our excuses
     With absolute will. So, like the cavaliers
     Whose voices still are heard in the Romance
     Of silver-tongued Boccaccio, on the banks
     Of Arno, with soft tales of love beguiling
     The ear of languid beauty, plague-exiled
     From stately Florence, we rehearsed our rhymes
     To their fair auditor, and shared by turns
     Her kind approval and her playful censure.

     It may be that these fragments owe alone
     To the fair setting of their circumstances,--
     The associations of time, scene, and audience,--
     Their place amid the pictures which fill up
     The chambers of my memory. Yet I trust
     That some, who sigh, while wandering in thought,
     Pilgrims of Romance o'er the olden world,
     That our broad land,--our sea-like lakes and mountains
     Piled to the clouds, our rivers overhung
     By forests which have known no other change
     For ages than the budding and the fall
     Of leaves, our valleys lovelier than those
     Which the old poets sang of,--should but figure
     On the apocryphal chart of speculation
     As pastures, wood-lots, mill-sites, with the privileges,
     Rights, and appurtenances, which make up
     A Yankee Paradise, unsung, unknown,
     To beautiful tradition; even their names,
     Whose melody yet lingers like the last
     Vibration of the red man's requiem,
     Exchanged for syllables significant,
     Of cotton-mill and rail-car, will look kindly
     Upon this effort to call up the ghost
     Of our dim Past, and listen with pleased ear
     To the responses of the questioned Shade.




I. THE MERRIMAC.

     O child of that white-crested mountain whose
     springs
     Gush forth in the shade of the cliff-eagle's
     wings,
     Down whose slopes to the lowlands thy wild waters
     shine,
     Leaping gray walls of rock, flashing through the
     dwarf pine;
     From that cloud-curtained cradle so cold and so
     lone,
     From the arms of that wintry-locked mother of
     stone,
     By hills hung with forests, through vales wide and
     free,
     Thy mountain-born brightness glanced down to the
     sea.

     No bridge arched thy waters save that where the
     trees
     Stretched their long arms above thee and kissed in
     the breeze:
     No sound save the lapse of the waves on thy
     shores,
     The plunging of otters, the light dip of oars.

     Green-tufted, oak-shaded, by Amoskeag's fall
     Thy twin Uncanoonucs rose stately and tall,
     Thy Nashua meadows lay green and unshorn,
     And the hills of Pentucket were tasselled with
     corn.
     But thy Pennacook valley was fairer than these,
     And greener its grasses and taller its trees,
     Ere the sound of an axe in the forest had rung,
     Or the mower his scythe in the meadows had
     swung.

     In their sheltered repose looking out from the
     wood
     The bark-builded wigwams of Pennacook stood;
     There glided the corn-dance, the council-fire shone,
     And against the red war-post the hatchet was
     thrown.

     There the old smoked in silence their pipes, and
     the young
     To the pike and the white-perch their baited lines
     flung;
     There the boy shaped his arrows, and there the
     shy maid
     Wove her many-hued baskets and bright wampum
     braid.

     O Stream of the Mountains! if answer of thine
     Could rise from thy waters to question of mine,
     Methinks through the din of thy thronged banks
     a moan
     Of sorrow would swell for the days which have
     gone.

     Not for thee the dull jar of the loom and the wheel,
     The gliding of shuttles, the ringing of steel;
     But that old voice of waters, of bird and of breeze,
     The dip of the wild-fowl, the rustling of trees.




II. THE BASHABA.

     Lift we the twilight curtains of the Past,
     And, turning from familiar sight and sound,
     Sadly and full of reverence let us cast
     A glance upon Tradition's shadowy ground,
     Led by the few pale lights which, glimmering round
     That dim, strange land of Eld, seem dying fast;
     And that which history gives not to the eye,
     The faded coloring of Time's tapestry,
     Let Fancy, with her dream-dipped brush, supply.

     Roof of bark and walls of pine,
     Through whose chinks the sunbeams shine,
     Tracing many a golden line
     On the ample floor within;
     Where, upon that earth-floor stark,
     Lay the gaudy mats of bark,
     With the bear's hide, rough and dark,
     And the red-deer's skin.

     Window-tracery, small and slight,
     Woven of the willow white,
     Lent a dimly checkered light;
     And the night-stars glimmered down,
     Where the lodge-fire's heavy smoke,
     Slowly through an opening broke,
     In the low roof, ribbed with oak,
     Sheathed with hemlock brown.

     Gloomed behind the changeless shade
     By the solemn pine-wood made;
     Through the rugged palisade,
     In the open foreground planted,
     Glimpses came of rowers rowing,
     Stir of leaves and wild-flowers blowing,
     Steel-like gleams of water flowing,
     In the sunlight slanted.

     Here the mighty Bashaba
     Held his long-unquestioned sway,
     From the White Hills, far away,
     To the great sea's sounding shore;
     Chief of chiefs, his regal word
     All the river Sachems heard,
     At his call the war-dance stirred,
     Or was still once more.

     There his spoils of chase and war,
     Jaw of wolf and black bear's paw,
     Panther's skin and eagle's claw,
     Lay beside his axe and bow;
     And, adown the roof-pole hung,
     Loosely on a snake-skin strung,
     In the smoke his scalp-locks swung
     Grimly to and fro.

     Nightly down the river going,
     Swifter was the hunter's rowing,
     When he saw that lodge-fire, glowing
     O'er the waters still and red;
     And the squaw's dark eye burned brighter,
     And she drew her blanket tighter,
     As, with quicker step and lighter,
     From that door she fled.

     For that chief had magic skill,
     And a Panisee's dark will,
     Over powers of good and ill,
     Powers which bless and powers which ban;
     Wizard lord of Pennacook,
     Chiefs upon their war-path shook,
     When they met the steady look
     Of that wise dark man.

     Tales of him the gray squaw told,
     When the winter night-wind cold
     Pierced her blanket's thickest fold,
     And her fire burned low and small,
     Till the very child abed,
     Drew its bear-skin over bead,
     Shrinking from the pale lights shed
     On the trembling wall.

     All the subtle spirits hiding
     Under earth or wave, abiding
     In the caverned rock, or riding
     Misty clouds or morning breeze;
     Every dark intelligence,
     Secret soul, and influence
     Of all things which outward sense
     Feels, or bears, or sees,--

     These the wizard's skill confessed,
     At his bidding banned or blessed,
     Stormful woke or lulled to rest
     Wind and cloud, and fire and flood;
     Burned for him the drifted snow,
     Bade through ice fresh lilies blow,
     And the leaves of summer grow
     Over winter's wood!

     Not untrue that tale of old!
     Now, as then, the wise and bold
     All the powers of Nature hold
     Subject to their kingly will;
     From the wondering crowds ashore,
     Treading life's wild waters o'er,
     As upon a marble floor,
     Moves the strong man still.

     Still, to such, life's elements
     With their sterner laws dispense,
     And the chain of consequence
     Broken in their pathway lies;
     Time and change their vassals making,
     Flowers from icy pillows waking,
     Tresses of the sunrise shaking
     Over midnight skies.
     Still, to th' earnest soul, the sun
     Rests on towered Gibeon,
     And the moon of Ajalon
     Lights the battle-grounds of life;
     To his aid the strong reverses
     Hidden powers and giant forces,
     And the high stars, in their courses,
     Mingle in his strife!




III. THE DAUGHTER.

     The soot-black brows of men, the yell
     Of women thronging round the bed,
     The tinkling charm of ring and shell,
     The Powah whispering o'er the dead!

     All these the Sachem's home had known,
     When, on her journey long and wild
     To the dim World of Souls, alone,
     In her young beauty passed the mother of his child.

     Three bow-shots from the Sachem's dwelling
     They laid her in the walnut shade,
     Where a green hillock gently swelling
     Her fitting mound of burial made.
     There trailed the vine in summer hours,
     The tree-perched squirrel dropped his shell,--
     On velvet moss and pale-hued flowers,
     Woven with leaf and spray, the softened sunshine fell!

     The Indian's heart is hard and cold,
     It closes darkly o'er its care,
     And formed in Nature's sternest mould,
     Is slow to feel, and strong to bear.
     The war-paint on the Sachem's face,
     Unwet with tears, shone fierce and red,
     And still, in battle or in chase,
     Dry leaf and snow-rime crisped beneath his
     foremost tread.

     Yet when her name was heard no more,
     And when the robe her mother gave,
     And small, light moccasin she wore,
     Had slowly wasted on her grave,
     Unmarked of him the dark maids sped
     Their sunset dance and moonlit play;
     No other shared his lonely bed,
     No other fair young head upon his bosom lay.

     A lone, stern man. Yet, as sometimes
     The tempest-smitten tree receives
     From one small root the sap which climbs
     Its topmost spray and crowning leaves,
     So from his child the Sachem drew
     A life of Love and Hope, and felt
     His cold and rugged nature through
     The softness and the warmth of her young
     being melt.

     A laugh which in the woodland rang
     Bemocking April's gladdest bird,--
     A light and graceful form which sprang
     To meet him when his step was heard,--
     Eyes by his lodge-fire flashing dark,
     Small fingers stringing bead and shell
     Or weaving mats of bright-hued bark,--
     With these the household-god (3) had graced
     his wigwam well.

     Child of the forest! strong and free,
     Slight-robed, with loosely flowing hair,
     She swam the lake or climbed the tree,
     Or struck the flying bird in air.
     O'er the heaped drifts of winter's moon
     Her snow-shoes tracked the hunter's way;
     And dazzling in the summer noon
     The blade of her light oar threw off its shower
     of spray!

     Unknown to her the rigid rule,
     The dull restraint, the chiding frown,
     The weary torture of the school,
     The taming of wild nature down.
     Her only lore, the legends told
     Around the hunter's fire at night;
     Stars rose and set, and seasons rolled,
     Flowers bloomed and snow-flakes fell, unquestioned
     in her sight.

     Unknown to her the subtle skill
     With which the artist-eye can trace
     In rock and tree and lake and hill
     The outlines of divinest grace;
     Unknown the fine soul's keen unrest,
     Which sees, admires, yet yearns alway;
     Too closely on her mother's breast
     To note her smiles of love the child of Nature lay!

     It is enough for such to be
     Of common, natural things a part,
     To feel, with bird and stream and tree,
     The pulses of the same great heart;
     But we, from Nature long exiled,
     In our cold homes of Art and Thought
     Grieve like the stranger-tended child,
     Which seeks its mother's arms, and sees but feels
     them not.

     The garden rose may richly bloom
     In cultured soil and genial air,
     To cloud the light of Fashion's room
     Or droop in Beauty's midnight hair;
     In lonelier grace, to sun and dew
     The sweetbrier on the hillside shows
     Its single leaf and fainter hue,
     Untrained and wildly free, yet still a sister rose!

     Thus o'er the heart of Weetamoo
     Their mingling shades of joy and ill
     The instincts of her nature threw;
     The savage was a woman still.
     Midst outlines dim of maiden schemes,
     Heart-colored prophecies of life,
     Rose on the ground of her young dreams
     The light of a new home, the lover and the wife.




IV. THE WEDDING.

     Cool and dark fell the autumn night,
     But the Bashaba's wigwam glowed with light,
     For down from its roof, by green withes hung,
     Flaring and smoking the pine-knots swung.

     And along the river great wood-fires
     Shot into the night their long, red spires,
     Showing behind the tall, dark wood,
     Flashing before on the sweeping flood.

     In the changeful wind, with shimmer and shade,
     Now high, now low, that firelight played,
     On tree-leaves wet with evening dews,
     On gliding water and still canoes.

     The trapper that night on Turee's brook,
     And the weary fisher on Contoocook,
     Saw over the marshes, and through the pine,
     And down on the river, the dance-lights shine.
     For the Saugus Sachem had come to woo
     The Bashaba's daughter Weetamoo,
     And laid at her father's feet that night
     His softest furs and wampum white.

     From the Crystal Hills to the far southeast
     The river Sagamores came to the feast;
     And chiefs whose homes the sea-winds shook
     Sat down on the mats of Pennacook.

     They came from Sunapee's shore of rock,
     From the snowy sources of Snooganock,
     And from rough Coos whose thick woods shake
     Their pine-cones in Umbagog Lake.

     From Ammonoosuc's mountain pass,
     Wild as his home, came Chepewass;
     And the Keenomps of the bills which throw
     Their shade on the Smile of Manito.

     With pipes of peace and bows unstrung,
     Glowing with paint came old and young,
     In wampum and furs and feathers arrayed,
     To the dance and feast the Bashaba made.

     Bird of the air and beast of the field,
     All which the woods and the waters yield,
     On dishes of birch and hemlock piled,
     Garnished and graced that banquet wild.

     Steaks of the brown bear fat and large
     From the rocky slopes of the Kearsarge;
     Delicate trout from Babboosuck brook,
     And salmon speared in the Contoocook;

     Squirrels which fed where nuts fell thick
     in the gravelly bed of the Otternic;
     And small wild-hens in reed-snares caught
     from the banks of Sondagardee brought;

     Pike and perch from the Suncook taken,
     Nuts from the trees of the Black Hills shaken,
     Cranberries picked in the Squamscot bog,
     And grapes from the vines of Piscataquog:

     And, drawn from that great stone vase which stands
     In the river scooped by a spirit's hands,(4)
     Garnished with spoons of shell and horn,
     Stood the birchen dishes of smoking corn.

     Thus bird of the air and beast of the field,
     All which the woods and the waters yield,
     Furnished in that olden day
     The bridal feast of the Bashaba.

     And merrily when that feast was done
     On the fire-lit green the dance begun,
     With squaws' shrill stave, and deeper hum
     Of old men beating the Indian drum.

     Painted and plumed, with scalp-locks flowing,
     And red arms tossing and black eyes glowing,
     Now in the light and now in the shade
     Around the fires the dancers played.

     The step was quicker, the song more shrill,
     And the beat of the small drums louder still
     Whenever within the circle drew
     The Saugus Sachem and Weetamoo.

     The moons of forty winters had shed
     Their snow upon that chieftain's head,
     And toil and care and battle's chance
     Had seamed his hard, dark countenance.

     A fawn beside the bison grim,--
     Why turns the bride's fond eye on him,
     In whose cold look is naught beside
     The triumph of a sullen pride?

     Ask why the graceful grape entwines
     The rough oak with her arm of vines;
     And why the gray rock's rugged cheek
     The soft lips of the mosses seek.

     Why, with wise instinct, Nature seems
     To harmonize her wide extremes,
     Linking the stronger with the weak,
     The haughty with the soft and meek!




V. THE NEW HOME.

     A wild and broken landscape, spiked with firs,
     Roughening the bleak horizon's northern edge;
     Steep, cavernous hillsides, where black hemlock
     spurs
     And sharp, gray splinters of the wind-swept
     ledge
     Pierced the thin-glazed ice, or bristling rose,
     Where the cold rim of the sky sunk down upon
     the snows.

     And eastward cold, wide marshes stretched away,
     Dull, dreary flats without a bush or tree,
     O'er-crossed by icy creeks, where twice a day
     Gurgled the waters of the moon-struck sea;
     And faint with distance came the stifled roar,
     The melancholy lapse of waves on that low shore.

     No cheerful village with its mingling smokes,
     No laugh of children wrestling in the snow,
     No camp-fire blazing through the hillside oaks,
     No fishers kneeling on the ice below;
     Yet midst all desolate things of sound and view,
     Through the long winter moons smiled dark-eyed
     Weetamoo.

     Her heart had found a home; and freshly all
     Its beautiful affections overgrew
     Their rugged prop. As o'er some granite wall
     Soft vine-leaves open to the moistening dew
     And warm bright sun, the love of that young wife
     Found on a hard cold breast the dew and warmth
     of life.

     The steep, bleak hills, the melancholy shore,
     The long, dead level of the marsh between,
     A coloring of unreal beauty wore
     Through the soft golden mist of young love seen.
     For o'er those hills and from that dreary plain,
     Nightly she welcomed home her hunter chief again.

     No warmth of heart, no passionate burst of feeling,
     Repaid her welcoming smile and parting kiss,
     No fond and playful dalliance half concealing,
     Under the guise of mirth, its tenderness;

     But, in their stead, the warrior's settled pride,
     And vanity's pleased smile with homage satisfied.

     Enough for Weetamoo, that she alone
     Sat on his mat and slumbered at his side;
     That he whose fame to her young ear had flown
     Now looked upon her proudly as his bride;
     That he whose name the Mohawk trembling heard
     Vouchsafed to her at times a kindly look or word.

     For she had learned the maxims of her race,
     Which teach the woman to become a slave,
     And feel herself the pardonless disgrace
     Of love's fond weakness in the wise and brave,--
     The scandal and the shame which they incur,
     Who give to woman all which man requires of her.

     So passed the winter moons. The sun at last
     Broke link by link the frost chain of the rills,
     And the warm breathings of the southwest passed
     Over the hoar rime of the Saugus hills;
     The gray and desolate marsh grew green once more,
     And the birch-tree's tremulous shade fell round the
     Sachem's door.

     Then from far Pennacook swift runners came,
     With gift and greeting for the Saugus chief;
     Beseeching him in the great Sachem's name,
     That, with the coming of the flower and leaf,
     The song of birds, the warm breeze and the rain,
     Young Weetamoo might greet her lonely sire again.

     And Winnepurkit called his chiefs together,
     And a grave council in his wigwam met,
     Solemn and brief in words, considering whether
     The rigid rules of forest etiquette
     Permitted Weetamoo once more to look
     Upon her father's face and green-banked
     Pennacook.

     With interludes of pipe-smoke and strong water,
     The forest sages pondered, and at length,
     Concluded in a body to escort her
     Up to her father's home of pride and strength,
     Impressing thus on Pennacook a sense
     Of Winnepurkit's power and regal consequence.

     So through old woods which Aukeetamit's(5) hand,
     A soft and many-shaded greenness lent,
     Over high breezy hills, and meadow land
     Yellow with flowers, the wild procession went,
     Till, rolling down its wooded banks between,
     A broad, clear, mountain stream, the Merrimac
     was seen.

     The hunter leaning on his bow undrawn,
     The fisher lounging on the pebbled shores,
     Squaws in the clearing dropping the seed-corn,
     Young children peering through the wigwam doors,
     Saw with delight, surrounded by her train
     Of painted Saugus braves, their Weetamoo again.




VI. AT PENNACOOK.

     The hills are dearest which our childish feet
     Have climbed the earliest; and the streams most sweet
     Are ever those at which our young lips drank,
     Stooped to their waters o'er the grassy bank.

     Midst the cold dreary sea-watch, Home's hearth-light
     Shines round the helmsman plunging through the night;
     And still, with inward eye, the traveller sees
     In close, dark, stranger streets his native trees.

     The home-sick dreamer's brow is nightly fanned
     By breezes whispering of his native land,
     And on the stranger's dim and dying eye
     The soft, sweet pictures of his childhood lie.

     Joy then for Weetamoo, to sit once more
     A child upon her father's wigwam floor!
     Once more with her old fondness to beguile
     From his cold eye the strange light of a smile.

     The long, bright days of summer swiftly passed,
     The dry leaves whirled in autumn's rising blast,
     And evening cloud and whitening sunrise rime
     Told of the coming of the winter-time.

     But vainly looked, the while, young Weetamoo,
     Down the dark river for her chief's canoe;
     No dusky messenger from Saugus brought
     The grateful tidings which the young wife sought.

     At length a runner from her father sent,
     To Winnepurkit's sea-cooled wigwam went
     "Eagle of Saugus,--in the woods the dove
     Mourns for the shelter of thy wings of love."

     But the dark chief of Saugus turned aside
     In the grim anger of hard-hearted pride;
     "I bore her as became a chieftain's daughter,
     Up to her home beside the gliding water.

     If now no more a mat for her is found
     Of all which line her father's wigwam round,
     Let Pennacook call out his warrior train,
     And send her back with wampum gifts again."

     The baffled runner turned upon his track,
     Bearing the words of Winnepurkit back.
     "Dog of the Marsh," cried Pennacook, "no more
     Shall child of mine sit on his wigwam floor.

     "Go, let him seek some meaner squaw to spread
     The stolen bear-skin of his beggar's bed;
     Son of a fish-hawk! let him dig his clams
     For some vile daughter of the Agawams,

     "Or coward Nipmucks! may his scalp dry black
     In Mohawk smoke, before I send her back."
     He shook his clenched hand towards the ocean wave,
     While hoarse assent his listening council gave.

     Alas poor bride! can thy grim sire impart
     His iron hardness to thy woman's heart?
     Or cold self-torturing pride like his atone
     For love denied and life's warm beauty flown?

     On Autumn's gray and mournful grave the snow
     Hung its white wreaths; with stifled voice and low
     The river crept, by one vast bridge o'er-crossed,
     Built by the boar-locked artisan of Frost.

     And many a moon in beauty newly born
     Pierced the red sunset with her silver horn,
     Or, from the east, across her azure field
     Rolled the wide brightness of her full-orbed shield.

     Yet Winnepurkit came not,--on the mat
     Of the scorned wife her dusky rival sat;
     And he, the while, in Western woods afar,
     Urged the long chase, or trod the path of war.

     Dry up thy tears, young daughter of a chief!
     Waste not on him the sacredness of grief;
     Be the fierce spirit of thy sire thine own,
     His lips of scorning, and his heart of stone.

     What heeds the warrior of a hundred fights,
     The storm-worn watcher through long hunting nights,
     Cold, crafty, proud of woman's weak distress,
     Her home-bound grief and pining loneliness?




VII. THE DEPARTURE.

     The wild March rains had fallen fast and long
     The snowy mountains of the North among,
     Making each vale a watercourse, each hill
     Bright with the cascade of some new-made rill.

     Gnawed by the sunbeams, softened by the rain,
     Heaved underneath by the swollen current's strain,
     The ice-bridge yielded, and the Merrimac
     Bore the huge ruin crashing down its track.

     On that strong turbid water, a small boat
     Guided by one weak hand was seen to float;
     Evil the fate which loosed it from the shore,
     Too early voyager with too frail an oar!

     Down the vexed centre of that rushing tide,
     The thick huge ice-blocks threatening either side,
     The foam-white rocks of Amoskeag in view,
     With arrowy swiftness sped that light canoe.

     The trapper, moistening his moose's meat
     On the wet bank by Uncanoonuc's feet,
     Saw the swift boat flash down the troubled stream;
     Slept he, or waked he? was it truth or dream?

     The straining eye bent fearfully before,
     The small hand clenching on the useless oar,
     The bead-wrought blanket trailing o'er the water--
     He knew them all--woe for the Sachem's daughter!

     Sick and aweary of her lonely life,
     Heedless of peril, the still faithful wife
     Had left her mother's grave, her father's door,
     To seek the wigwam of her chief once more.

     Down the white rapids like a sear leaf whirled,
     On the sharp rocks and piled-up ices hurled,
     Empty and broken, circled the canoe
     In the vexed pool below--but where was Weetamoo.




VIII. SONG OF INDIAN WOMEN.

     The Dark eye has left us,
     The Spring-bird has flown;
     On the pathway of spirits
     She wanders alone.
     The song of the wood-dove has died on our shore
     Mat wonck kunna-monee!(6) We hear it no more!

     O dark water Spirit
     We cast on thy wave
     These furs which may never
     Hang over her grave;
     Bear down to the lost one the robes that she wore
     Mat wonck kunna-monee! We see her no more!

     Of the strange land she walks in
     No Powah has told:
     It may burn with the sunshine,
     Or freeze with the cold.
     Let us give to our lost one the robes that she wore:
     Mat wonck kunna-monee! We see her no more!

     The path she is treading
     Shall soon be our own;
     Each gliding in shadow
     Unseen and alone!
     In vain shall we call on the souls gone before:
     Mat wonck kunna-monee! They hear us no more!

     O mighty Sowanna!(7)
     Thy gateways unfold,
     From thy wigwam of sunset
     Lift curtains of gold!

     Take home the poor Spirit whose journey is o'er
     Mat wonck kunna-monee! We see her no more!

     So sang the Children of the Leaves beside
     The broad, dark river's coldly flowing tide;
     Now low, now harsh, with sob-like pause and swell,
     On the high wind their voices rose and fell.
     Nature's wild music,--sounds of wind-swept trees,
     The scream of birds, the wailing of the breeze,
     The roar of waters, steady, deep, and strong,--
     Mingled and murmured in that farewell song.

     1844.




BARCLAY OF URY.

Among the earliest converts to the doctrines of Friends in Scotland was
Barclay of Ury, an old and distinguished soldier, who had fought under
Gustavus Adolphus, in Germany. As a Quaker, he became the object of
persecution and abuse at the hands of the magistrates and the populace.
None bore the indignities of the mob with greater patience and nobleness
of soul than this once proud gentleman and soldier. One of his friends,
on an occasion of uncommon rudeness, lamented that he should be treated
so harshly in his old age who had been so honored before. "I find more
satisfaction," said Barclay, "as well as honor, in being thus insulted
for my religious principles, than when, a few years ago, it was usual
for the magistrates, as I passed the city of Aberdeen, to meet me on the
road and conduct me to public entertainment in their hall, and then
escort me out again, to gain my favor."

     Up the streets of Aberdeen,
     By the kirk and college green,
     Rode the Laird of Ury;
     Close behind him, close beside,
     Foul of mouth and evil-eyed,
     Pressed the mob in fury.

     Flouted him the drunken churl,
     Jeered at him the serving-girl,
     Prompt to please her master;
     And the begging carlin, late
     Fed and clothed at Ury's gate,
     Cursed him as he passed her.

     Yet, with calm and stately mien,
     Up the streets of Aberdeen
     Came he slowly riding;
     And, to all he saw and heard,
     Answering not with bitter word,
     Turning not for chiding.

     Came a troop with broadswords swinging,
     Bits and bridles sharply ringing,
     Loose and free and froward;
     Quoth the foremost, "Ride him down!
     Push him! prick him! through the town
     Drive the Quaker coward!"

     But from out the thickening crowd
     Cried a sudden voice and loud
     "Barclay! Ho! a Barclay!"
     And the old man at his side
     Saw a comrade, battle tried,
     Scarred and sunburned darkly;

     Who with ready weapon bare,
     Fronting to the troopers there,
     Cried aloud: "God save us,
     Call ye coward him who stood
     Ankle deep in Lutzen's blood,
     With the brave Gustavus?"

     "Nay, I do not need thy sword,
     Comrade mine," said Ury's lord;
     "Put it up, I pray thee
     Passive to His holy will,
     Trust I in my Master still,
     Even though He slay me.

     "Pledges of thy love and faith,
     Proved on many a field of death,
     Not by me are needed."
     Marvelled much that henchman bold,
     That his laird, so stout of old,
     Now so meekly pleaded.

     "Woe's the day!" he sadly said,
     With a slowly shaking head,
     And a look of pity;
     "Ury's honest lord reviled,
     Mock of knave and sport of child,
     In his own good city.

     "Speak the word, and, master mine,
     As we charged on Tilly's(8) line,
     And his Walloon lancers,
     Smiting through their midst we'll teach
     Civil look and decent speech
     To these boyish prancers!"

     "Marvel not, mine ancient friend,
     Like beginning, like the end:"
     Quoth the Laird of Ury;
     "Is the sinful servant more
     Than his gracious Lord who bore
     Bonds and stripes in Jewry?

     "Give me joy that in His name
     I can bear, with patient frame,
     All these vain ones offer;
     While for them He suffereth long,
     Shall I answer wrong with wrong,
     Scoffing with the scoffer?

     "Happier I, with loss of all,
     Hunted, outlawed, held in thrall,
     With few friends to greet me,
     Than when reeve and squire were seen,
     Riding out from Aberdeen,
     With bared heads to meet me.

     "When each goodwife, o'er and o'er,
     Blessed me as I passed her door;
     And the snooded daughter,
     Through her casement glancing down,
     Smiled on him who bore renown
     From red fields of slaughter.

     "Hard to feel the stranger's scoff,
     Hard the old friend's falling off,
     Hard to learn forgiving;
     But the Lord His own rewards,
     And His love with theirs accords,
     Warm and fresh and living.

     "Through this dark and stormy night
     Faith beholds a feeble light
     Up the blackness streaking;
     Knowing God's own time is best,
     In a patient hope I rest
     For the full day-breaking!"

     So the Laird of Ury said,
     Turning slow his horse's head
     Towards the Tolbooth prison,
     Where, through iron gates, he heard
     Poor disciples of the Word
     Preach of Christ arisen!

     Not in vain, Confessor old,
     Unto us the tale is told
     Of thy day of trial;
     Every age on him who strays
     From its broad and beaten ways
     Pours its seven-fold vial.

     Happy he whose inward ear
     Angel comfortings can hear,
     O'er the rabble's laughter;
     And while Hatred's fagots burn,
     Glimpses through the smoke discern
     Of the good hereafter.

     Knowing this, that never yet
     Share of Truth was vainly set
     In the world's wide fallow;
     After hands shall sow the seed,
     After hands from hill and mead
     Reap the harvests yellow.

     Thus, with somewhat of the Seer,
     Must the moral pioneer
     From the Future borrow;
     Clothe the waste with dreams of grain,
     And, on midnight's sky of rain,
     Paint the golden morrow!




THE ANGELS OF BUENA VISTA.

A letter-writer from Mexico during the Mexican war, when detailing some
of the incidents at the terrible fight of Buena Vista, mentioned that
Mexican women were seen hovering near the field of death, for the
purpose of giving aid and succor to the wounded. One poor woman was
found surrounded by the maimed and suffering of both armies, ministering
to the wants of Americans as well as Mexicans, with impartial
tenderness.

     SPEAK and tell us, our Ximena, looking northward
     far away,
     O'er the camp of the invaders, o'er the Mexican
     array,
     Who is losing? who is winning? are they far or
     come they near?
     Look abroad, and tell us, sister, whither rolls the
     storm we hear.
     Down the hills of Angostura still the storm of
     battle rolls;
     Blood is flowing, men are dying; God have mercy
     on their souls!
     "Who is losing? who is winning?" Over hill
     and over plain,
     I see but smoke of cannon clouding through the
     mountain rain.

     Holy Mother! keep our brothers! Look, Ximena,
     look once more.
     "Still I see the fearful whirlwind rolling darkly
     as before,
     Bearing on, in strange confusion, friend and foeman,
     foot and horse,
     Like some wild and troubled torrent sweeping
     down its mountain course."

     Look forth once more, Ximena! "Ah! the smoke
     has rolled away;
     And I see the Northern rifles gleaming down the
     ranks of gray.
     Hark! that sudden blast of bugles! there the troop
     of Minon wheels;
     There the Northern horses thunder, with the cannon
     at their heels.

     "Jesu, pity I how it thickens I now retreat and
     now advance!
     Bight against the blazing cannon shivers Puebla's
     charging lance!
     Down they go, the brave young riders; horse and
     foot together fall;
     Like a ploughshare in the fallow, through them
     ploughs the Northern ball."

     Nearer came the storm and nearer, rolling fast and
     frightful on!
     Speak, Ximena, speak and tell us, who has lost,
     and who has won?
     Alas! alas! I know not; friend and foe together
     fall,
     O'er the dying rush the living: pray, my sisters,
     for them all!

     "Lo! the wind the smoke is lifting. Blessed
     Mother, save my brain!
     I can see the wounded crawling slowly out from
     heaps of slain.
     Now they stagger, blind and bleeding; now they
     fall, and strive to rise;
     Hasten, sisters, haste and save them, lest they die
     before our eyes!

     "O my hearts love! O my dear one! lay thy
     poor head on my knee;
     Dost thou know the lips that kiss thee? Canst
     thou hear me? canst thou see?
     O my husband, brave and gentle! O my Bernal,
     look once more
     On the blessed cross before thee! Mercy!
     all is o'er!"

     Dry thy tears, my poor Ximena; lay thy dear one
     down to rest;
     Let his hands be meekly folded, lay the cross upon
     his breast;
     Let his dirge be sung hereafter, and his funeral
     masses said;
     To-day, thou poor bereaved one, the living ask thy
     aid.

     Close beside her, faintly moaning, fair and young,
     a soldier lay,
     Torn with shot and pierced with lances, bleeding
     slow his life away;
     But, as tenderly before him the lorn Ximena knelt,
     She saw the Northern eagle shining on his pistol-
     belt.

     With a stifled cry of horror straight she turned
     away her head;
     With a sad and bitter feeling looked she back upon
     her dead;
     But she heard the youth's low moaning, and his
     struggling breath of pain,
     And she raised the cooling water to his parching
     lips again.

     Whispered low the dying soldier, pressed her hand
     and faintly smiled;
     Was that pitying face his mother's? did she watch
     beside her child?
     All his stranger words with meaning her woman's
     heart supplied;
     With her kiss upon his forehead, "Mother!"
     murmured he, and died!

     "A bitter curse upon them, poor boy, who led thee
     forth,
     From some gentle, sad-eyed mother, weeping, lonely,
     in the North!"
     Spake the mournful Mexic woman, as she laid him
     with her dead,
     And turned to soothe the living, and bind the
     wounds which bled.

     "Look forth once more, Ximena!" Like a cloud
     before the wind
     Rolls the battle down the mountains, leaving blood
     and death behind;
     Ah! they plead in vain for mercy; in the dust the
     wounded strive;
     "Hide your faces, holy angels! O thou Christ of
     God, forgive!"

     Sink, O Night, among thy mountains! let the cool,
     gray shadows fall;
     Dying brothers, fighting demons, drop thy curtain
     over all!
     Through the thickening winter twilight, wide apart
     the battle rolled,
     In its sheath the sabre rested, and the cannon's
     lips grew cold.

     But the noble Mexic women still their holy task
     pursued,
     Through that long, dark night of sorrow, worn and
     faint and lacking food.
     Over weak and suffering brothers, with a tender
     care they hung,
     And the dying foeman blessed them in a strange
     and Northern tongue.

     Not wholly lost, O Father! is this evil world of
     ours;
     Upward, through its blood and ashes, spring afresh
     the Eden flowers;
     From its smoking hell of battle, Love and Pity
     send their prayer,
     And still thy white-winged angels hover dimly in
     our air!

     1847.




THE LEGEND OF ST. MARK.

"This legend (to which my attention was called by my friend Charles
Sumner), is the subject of a celebrated picture by Tintoretto, of which
Mr. Rogers possesses the original sketch. The slave lies on the ground,
amid a crowd of spectators, who look on, animated by all the various
emotions of sympathy, rage, terror; a woman, in front, with a child in
her arms, has always been admired for the lifelike vivacity of her
attitude and expression. The executioner holds up the broken implements;
St. Mark, with a headlong movement, seems to rush down from heaven in
haste to save his worshipper. The dramatic grouping in this picture is
wonderful; the coloring, in its gorgeous depth and harmony, is, in Mr.
Rogers's sketch, finer than in the picture."--MRS. JAMESON'S Sacred and
Legendary Art, I. 154.

     THE day is closing dark and cold,
     With roaring blast and sleety showers;
     And through the dusk the lilacs wear
     The bloom of snow, instead of flowers.

     I turn me from the gloom without,
     To ponder o'er a tale of old;
     A legend of the age of Faith,
     By dreaming monk or abbess told.

     On Tintoretto's canvas lives
     That fancy of a loving heart,
     In graceful lines and shapes of power,
     And hues immortal as his art.

     In Provence (so the story runs)
     There lived a lord, to whom, as slave,
     A peasant-boy of tender years
     The chance of trade or conquest gave.

     Forth-looking from the castle tower,
     Beyond the hills with almonds dark,
     The straining eye could scarce discern
     The chapel of the good St. Mark.

     And there, when bitter word or fare
     The service of the youth repaid,
     By stealth, before that holy shrine,
     For grace to bear his wrong, he prayed.

     The steed stamped at the castle gate,
     The boar-hunt sounded on the hill;
     Why stayed the Baron from the chase,
     With looks so stern, and words so ill?

     "Go, bind yon slave! and let him learn,
     By scath of fire and strain of cord,
     How ill they speed who give dead saints
     The homage due their living lord!"

     They bound him on the fearful rack,
     When, through the dungeon's vaulted dark,
     He saw the light of shining robes,
     And knew the face of good St. Mark.

     Then sank the iron rack apart,
     The cords released their cruel clasp,
     The pincers, with their teeth of fire,
     Fell broken from the torturer's grasp.

     And lo! before the Youth and Saint,
     Barred door and wall of stone gave way;
     And up from bondage and the night
     They passed to freedom and the day!

     O dreaming monk! thy tale is true;
     O painter! true thy pencil's art;
     in tones of hope and prophecy,
     Ye whisper to my listening heart!

     Unheard no burdened heart's appeal
     Moans up to God's inclining ear;
     Unheeded by his tender eye,
     Falls to the earth no sufferer's tear.

     For still the Lord alone is God
     The pomp and power of tyrant man
     Are scattered at his lightest breath,
     Like chaff before the winnower's fan.

     Not always shall the slave uplift
     His heavy hands to Heaven in vain.
     God's angel, like the good St. Mark,
     Comes shining down to break his chain!

     O weary ones! ye may not see
     Your helpers in their downward flight;
     Nor hear the sound of silver wings
     Slow beating through the hush of night!

     But not the less gray Dothan shone,
     With sunbright watchers bending low,
     That Fear's dim eye beheld alone
     The spear-heads of the Syrian foe.

     There are, who, like the Seer of old,
     Can see the helpers God has sent,
     And how life's rugged mountain-side
     Is white with many an angel tent!

     They hear the heralds whom our Lord
     Sends down his pathway to prepare;
     And light, from others hidden, shines
     On their high place of faith and prayer.

     Let such, for earth's despairing ones,
     Hopeless, yet longing to be free,
     Breathe once again the Prophet's prayer
     "Lord, ope their eyes, that they may see!"

     1849.




KATHLEEN.

This ballad was originally published in my prose work, Leaves from
Margaret Smith's Journal, as the song of a wandering Milesian
schoolmaster. In the seventeenth century, slavery in the New World was
by no means confined to the natives of Africa. Political offenders and
criminals were transported by the British government to the plantations
of Barbadoes and Virginia, where they were sold like cattle in the
market. Kidnapping of free and innocent white persons was practised to a
considerable extent in the seaports of the United Kingdom.

     O NORAH, lay your basket down,
     And rest your weary hand,
     And come and hear me sing a song
     Of our old Ireland.

     There was a lord of Galaway,
     A mighty lord was he;
     And he did wed a second wife,
     A maid of low degree.

     But he was old, and she was young,
     And so, in evil spite,
     She baked the black bread for his kin,
     And fed her own with white.

     She whipped the maids and starved the kern,
     And drove away the poor;
     "Ah, woe is me!" the old lord said,
     "I rue my bargain sore!"

     This lord he had a daughter fair,
     Beloved of old and young,
     And nightly round the shealing-fires
     Of her the gleeman sung.

     "As sweet and good is young Kathleen
     As Eve before her fall;"
     So sang the harper at the fair,
     So harped he in the hall.

     "Oh, come to me, my daughter dear!
     Come sit upon my knee,
     For looking in your face, Kathleen,
     Your mother's own I see!"

     He smoothed and smoothed her hair away,
     He kissed her forehead fair;
     "It is my darling Mary's brow,
     It is my darling's hair!"

     Oh, then spake up the angry dame,
     "Get up, get up," quoth she,
     "I'll sell ye over Ireland,
     I'll sell ye o'er the sea!"

     She clipped her glossy hair away,
     That none her rank might know;
     She took away her gown of silk,
     And gave her one of tow,

     And sent her down to Limerick town
     And to a seaman sold
     This daughter of an Irish lord
     For ten good pounds in gold.

     The lord he smote upon his breast,
     And tore his beard so gray;
     But he was old, and she was young,
     And so she had her way.

     Sure that same night the Banshee howled
     To fright the evil dame,
     And fairy folks, who loved Kathleen,
     With funeral torches came.

     She watched them glancing through the trees,
     And glimmering down the hill;
     They crept before the dead-vault door,
     And there they all stood still!

     "Get up, old man! the wake-lights shine!"
     "Ye murthering witch," quoth he,
     "So I'm rid of your tongue, I little care
     If they shine for you or me."

     "Oh, whoso brings my daughter back,
     My gold and land shall have!"
     Oh, then spake up his handsome page,
     "No gold nor land I crave!

     "But give to me your daughter dear,
     Give sweet Kathleen to me,
     Be she on sea or be she on land,
     I'll bring her back to thee."

     "My daughter is a lady born,
     And you of low degree,
     But she shall be your bride the day
     You bring her back to me."

     He sailed east, he sailed west,
     And far and long sailed he,
     Until he came to Boston town,
     Across the great salt sea.

     "Oh, have ye seen the young Kathleen,
     The flower of Ireland?
     Ye'll know her by her eyes so blue,
     And by her snow-white hand!"

     Out spake an ancient man, "I know
     The maiden whom ye mean;
     I bought her of a Limerick man,
     And she is called Kathleen.

     "No skill hath she in household work,
     Her hands are soft and white,
     Yet well by loving looks and ways
     She doth her cost requite."

     So up they walked through Boston town,
     And met a maiden fair,
     A little basket on her arm
     So snowy-white and bare.

     "Come hither, child, and say hast thou
     This young man ever seen?"
     They wept within each other's arms,
     The page and young Kathleen.

     "Oh give to me this darling child,
     And take my purse of gold."
     "Nay, not by me," her master said,
     "Shall sweet Kathleen be sold.

     "We loved her in the place of one
     The Lord hath early ta'en;
     But, since her heart's in Ireland,
     We give her back again!"

     Oh, for that same the saints in heaven
     For his poor soul shall pray,
     And Mary Mother wash with tears
     His heresies away.

     Sure now they dwell in Ireland;
     As you go up Claremore
     Ye'll see their castle looking down
     The pleasant Galway shore.

     And the old lord's wife is dead and gone,
     And a happy man is he,
     For he sits beside his own Kathleen,
     With her darling on his knee.

     1849.




THE WELL OF LOCH MAREE

Pennant, in his Voyage to the Hebrides, describes the holy well of Loch
Maree, the waters of which were supposed to effect a miraculous cure of
melancholy, trouble, and insanity.

     CALM on the breast of Loch Maree
     A little isle reposes;
     A shadow woven of the oak
     And willow o'er it closes.

     Within, a Druid's mound is seen,
     Set round with stony warders;
     A fountain, gushing through the turf,
     Flows o'er its grassy borders.

     And whoso bathes therein his brow,
     With care or madness burning,
     Feels once again his healthful thought
     And sense of peace returning.

     O restless heart and fevered brain,
     Unquiet and unstable,
     That holy well of Loch Maree
     Is more than idle fable!

     Life's changes vex, its discords stun,
     Its glaring sunshine blindeth,
     And blest is he who on his way
     That fount of healing findeth!

     The shadows of a humbled will
     And contrite heart are o'er it;
     Go read its legend, "TRUST IN GOD,"
     On Faith's white stones before it.

     1850.




THE CHAPEL OF THE HERMITS.

The incident upon which this poem is based is related in a note to
Bernardin Henri Saint Pierre's Etudes de la Nature. "We arrived at the
habitation of the Hermits a little before they sat down to their table,
and while they were still at church. J. J. Rousseau proposed to me to
offer up our devotions. The hermits were reciting the Litanies of
Providence, which are remarkably beautiful. After we had addressed our
prayers to God, and the hermits were proceeding to the refectory,
Rousseau said to me, with his heart overflowing, 'At this moment I
experience what is said in the gospel: Where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. There is here a
feeling of peace and happiness which penetrates the soul.' I said, 'If
Finelon had lived, you would have been a Catholic.' He exclaimed, with
tears in his eyes, 'Oh, if Finelon were alive, I would struggle to get
into his service, even as a lackey!'" In my sketch of Saint Pierre, it
will be seen that I have somewhat antedated the period of his old age.
At that time he was not probably more than fifty. In describing him, I
have by no means exaggerated his own history of his mental condition at
the period of the story. In the fragmentary Sequel to his Studies of
Nature, he thus speaks of himself: "The ingratitude of those of whom I
had deserved kindness, unexpected family misfortunes, the total loss of
my small patrimony through enterprises solely undertaken for the benefit
of my country, the debts under which I lay oppressed, the blasting of
all my hopes,--these combined calamities made dreadful inroads upon my
health and reason. . . . I found it impossible to continue in a room
where there was company, especially if the doors were shut. I could not
even cross an alley in a public garden, if several persons had got
together in it. When alone, my malady subsided. I felt myself likewise
at ease in places where I saw children only. At the sight of any one
walking up to the place where I was, I felt my whole frame agitated, and
retired. I often said to myself, 'My sole study has been to merit well
of mankind; why do I fear them?'"

He attributes his improved health of mind and body to the counsels of
his friend, J. J. Rousseau. "I renounced," says he, "my books. I threw
my eyes upon the works of nature, which spake to all my senses a
language which neither time nor nations have it in their power to alter.
Thenceforth my histories and my journals were the herbage of the fields
and meadows. My thoughts did not go forth painfully after them, as in
the case of human systems; but their thoughts, under a thousand engaging
forms, quietly sought me. In these I studied, without effort, the laws
of that Universal Wisdom which had surrounded me from the cradle, but on
which heretofore I had bestowed little attention."

Speaking of Rousseau, he says: "I derived inexpressible satisfaction
from his society. What I prized still more than his genius was his
probity. He was one of the few literary characters, tried in the furnace
of affliction, to whom you could, with perfect security, confide your
most secret thoughts. . . . Even when he deviated, and became the victim
of himself or of others, he could forget his own misery in devotion to
the welfare of mankind. He was uniformly the advocate of the miserable.
There might be inscribed on his tomb these affecting words from that
Book of which he carried always about him some select passages, during
the last years of his life: 'His sins, which are many, are forgiven, for
he loved much.'"

     "I DO believe, and yet, in grief,
     I pray for help to unbelief;
     For needful strength aside to lay
     The daily cumberings of my way.

     "I 'm sick at heart of craft and cant,
     Sick of the crazed enthusiast's rant,
     Profession's smooth hypocrisies,
     And creeds of iron, and lives of ease.

     "I ponder o'er the sacred word,
     I read the record of our Lord;
     And, weak and troubled, envy them
     Who touched His seamless garment's hem;

     "Who saw the tears of love He wept
     Above the grave where Lazarus slept;
     And heard, amidst the shadows dim
     Of Olivet, His evening hymn.

     "How blessed the swineherd's low estate,
     The beggar crouching at the gate,
     The leper loathly and abhorred,
     Whose eyes of flesh beheld the Lord!

     "O sacred soil His sandals pressed!
     Sweet fountains of His noonday rest!
     O light and air of Palestine,
     Impregnate with His life divine!

     "Oh, bear me thither! Let me look
     On Siloa's pool, and Kedron's brook;
     Kneel at Gethsemane, and by
     Gennesaret walk, before I die!

     "Methinks this cold and northern night
     Would melt before that Orient light;
     And, wet by Hermon's dew and rain,
     My childhood's faith revive again!"

     So spake my friend, one autumn day,
     Where the still river slid away
     Beneath us, and above the brown
     Red curtains of the woods shut down.

     Then said I,--for I could not brook
     The mute appealing of his look,--
     "I, too, am weak, and faith is small,
     And blindness happeneth unto all.

     "Yet, sometimes glimpses on my sight,
     Through present wrong, the eternal right;
     And, step by step, since time began,
     I see the steady gain of man;

     "That all of good the past hath had
     Remains to make our own time glad,
     Our common daily life divine,
     And every land a Palestine.

     "Thou weariest of thy present state;
     What gain to thee time's holiest date?
     The doubter now perchance had been
     As High Priest or as Pilate then!

     "What thought Chorazin's scribes? What faith
     In Him had Nain and Nazareth?
     Of the few followers whom He led
     One sold Him,--all forsook and fled.

     "O friend! we need nor rock nor sand,
     Nor storied stream of Morning-Land;
     The heavens are glassed in Merrimac,--
     What more could Jordan render back?

     "We lack but open eye and ear
     To find the Orient's marvels here;
     The still small voice in autumn's hush,
     Yon maple wood the burning bush.

     "For still the new transcends the old,
     In signs and tokens manifold;
     Slaves rise up men; the olive waves,
     With roots deep set in battle graves!

     "Through the harsh noises of our day
     A low, sweet prelude finds its way;
     Through clouds of doubt, and creeds of fear,
     A light is breaking, calm and clear.

     "That song of Love, now low and far,
     Erelong shall swell from star to star!
     That light, the breaking day, which tips
     The golden-spired Apocalypse!"

     Then, when my good friend shook his head,
     And, sighing, sadly smiled, I said:
     "Thou mind'st me of a story told
     In rare Bernardin's leaves of gold."

     And while the slanted sunbeams wove
     The shadows of the frost-stained grove,
     And, picturing all, the river ran
     O'er cloud and wood, I thus began:--

      . . . . . . . . . . . . .

     In Mount Valerien's chestnut wood
     The Chapel of the Hermits stood;
     And thither, at the close of day,
     Came two old pilgrims, worn and gray.

     One, whose impetuous youth defied
     The storms of Baikal's wintry side,
     And mused and dreamed where tropic day
     Flamed o'er his lost Virginia's bay.

     His simple tale of love and woe
     All hearts had melted, high or low;--
     A blissful pain, a sweet distress,
     Immortal in its tenderness.

     Yet, while above his charmed page
     Beat quick the young heart of his age,
     He walked amidst the crowd unknown,
     A sorrowing old man, strange and lone.

     A homeless, troubled age,--the gray
     Pale setting of a weary day;
     Too dull his ear for voice of praise,
     Too sadly worn his brow for bays.

     Pride, lust of power and glory, slept;
     Yet still his heart its young dream kept,
     And, wandering like the deluge-dove,
     Still sought the resting-place of love.

     And, mateless, childless, envied more
     The peasant's welcome from his door
     By smiling eyes at eventide,
     Than kingly gifts or lettered pride.

     Until, in place of wife and child,
     All-pitying Nature on him smiled,
     And gave to him the golden keys
     To all her inmost sanctities.

     Mild Druid of her wood-paths dim!
     She laid her great heart bare to him,
     Its loves and sweet accords;--he saw
     The beauty of her perfect law.

     The language of her signs lie knew,
     What notes her cloudy clarion blew;
     The rhythm of autumn's forest dyes,
     The hymn of sunset's painted skies.

     And thus he seemed to hear the song
     Which swept, of old, the stars along;
     And to his eyes the earth once more
     Its fresh and primal beauty wore.

     Who sought with him, from summer air,
     And field and wood, a balm for care;
     And bathed in light of sunset skies
     His tortured nerves and weary eyes?

     His fame on all the winds had flown;
     His words had shaken crypt and throne;
     Like fire, on camp and court and cell
     They dropped, and kindled as they fell.

     Beneath the pomps of state, below
     The mitred juggler's masque and show,
     A prophecy, a vague hope, ran
     His burning thought from man to man.

     For peace or rest too well he saw
     The fraud of priests, the wrong of law,
     And felt how hard, between the two,
     Their breath of pain the millions drew.

     A prophet-utterance, strong and wild,
     The weakness of an unweaned child,
     A sun-bright hope for human-kind,
     And self-despair, in him combined.

     He loathed the false, yet lived not true
     To half the glorious truths he knew;
     The doubt, the discord, and the sin,
     He mourned without, he felt within.

     Untrod by him the path he showed,
     Sweet pictures on his easel glowed
     Of simple faith, and loves of home,
     And virtue's golden days to come.

     But weakness, shame, and folly made
     The foil to all his pen portrayed;
     Still, where his dreamy splendors shone,
     The shadow of himself was thrown.

     Lord, what is man, whose thought, at times,
     Up to Thy sevenfold brightness climbs,
     While still his grosser instinct clings
     To earth, like other creeping things!

     So rich in words, in acts so mean;
     So high, so low; chance-swung between
     The foulness of the penal pit
     And Truth's clear sky, millennium-lit!

     Vain, pride of star-lent genius!--vain,
     Quick fancy and creative brain,
     Unblest by prayerful sacrifice,
     Absurdly great, or weakly wise!

     Midst yearnings for a truer life,
     Without were fears, within was strife;
     And still his wayward act denied
     The perfect good for which he sighed.

     The love he sent forth void returned;
     The fame that crowned him scorched and burned,
     Burning, yet cold and drear and lone,--
     A fire-mount in a frozen zone!

     Like that the gray-haired sea-king passed,(9)
     Seen southward from his sleety mast,
     About whose brows of changeless frost
     A wreath of flame the wild winds tossed.

     Far round the mournful beauty played
     Of lambent light and purple shade,
     Lost on the fixed and dumb despair
     Of frozen earth and sea and air!

     A man apart, unknown, unloved
     By those whose wrongs his soul had moved,
     He bore the ban of Church and State,
     The good man's fear, the bigot's hate!

     Forth from the city's noise and throng,
     Its pomp and shame, its sin and wrong,
     The twain that summer day had strayed
     To Mount Valerien's chestnut shade.

     To them the green fields and the wood
     Lent something of their quietude,
     And golden-tinted sunset seemed
     Prophetical of all they dreamed.

     The hermits from their simple cares
     The bell was calling home to prayers,
     And, listening to its sound, the twain
     Seemed lapped in childhood's trust again.

     Wide open stood the chapel door;
     A sweet old music, swelling o'er
     Low prayerful murmurs, issued thence,--
     The Litanies of Providence!

     Then Rousseau spake: "Where two or three
     In His name meet, He there will be!"
     And then, in silence, on their knees
     They sank beneath the chestnut-trees.

     As to the blind returning light,
     As daybreak to the Arctic night,
     Old faith revived; the doubts of years
     Dissolved in reverential tears.

     That gush of feeling overpast,
     "Ah me!" Bernardin sighed at last,
     I would thy bitterest foes could see
     Thy heart as it is seen of me!

     "No church of God hast thou denied;
     Thou hast but spurned in scorn aside
     A bare and hollow counterfeit,
     Profaning the pure name of it!

     "With dry dead moss and marish weeds
     His fire the western herdsman feeds,
     And greener from the ashen plain
     The sweet spring grasses rise again.

     "Nor thunder-peal nor mighty wind
     Disturb the solid sky behind;
     And through the cloud the red bolt rends
     The calm, still smile of Heaven descends.

     "Thus through the world, like bolt and blast,
     And scourging fire, thy words have passed.
     Clouds break,--the steadfast heavens remain;
     Weeds burn,--the ashes feed the grain!

     "But whoso strives with wrong may find
     Its touch pollute, its darkness blind;
     And learn, as latent fraud is shown
     In others' faith, to doubt his own.

     "With dream and falsehood, simple trust
     And pious hope we tread in dust;
     Lost the calm faith in goodness,--lost
     The baptism of the Pentecost!

     "Alas!--the blows for error meant
     Too oft on truth itself are spent,
     As through the false and vile and base
     Looks forth her sad, rebuking face.

     "Not ours the Theban's charmed life;
     We come not scathless from the strife!
     The Python's coil about us clings,
     The trampled Hydra bites and stings!

     "Meanwhile, the sport of seeming chance,
     The plastic shapes of circumstance,
     What might have been we fondly guess,
     If earlier born, or tempted less.

     "And thou, in these wild, troubled days,
     Misjudged alike in blame and praise,
     Unsought and undeserved the same
     The skeptic's praise, the bigot's blame;--

     "I cannot doubt, if thou hadst been
     Among the highly favored men
     Who walked on earth with Fenelon,
     He would have owned thee as his son;

     "And, bright with wings of cherubim
     Visibly waving over him,
     Seen through his life, the Church had seemed
     All that its old confessors dreamed."

     "I would have been," Jean Jaques replied,
     "The humblest servant at his side,
     Obscure, unknown, content to see
     How beautiful man's life may be!

     "Oh, more than thrice-blest relic, more
     Than solemn rite or sacred lore,
     The holy life of one who trod
     The foot-marks of the Christ of God!

     "Amidst a blinded world he saw
     The oneness of the Dual law;
     That Heaven's sweet peace on Earth began,
     And God was loved through love of man.

     "He lived the Truth which reconciled
     The strong man Reason, Faith the child;
     In him belief and act were one,
     The homilies of duty done!"

     So speaking, through the twilight gray
     The two old pilgrims went their way.
     What seeds of life that day were sown,
     The heavenly watchers knew alone.

     Time passed, and Autumn came to fold
     Green Summer in her brown and gold;
     Time passed, and Winter's tears of snow
     Dropped on the grave-mound of Rousseau.

     "The tree remaineth where it fell,
     The pained on earth is pained in hell!"
     So priestcraft from its altars cursed
     The mournful doubts its falsehood nursed.

     Ah! well of old the Psalmist prayed,
     "Thy hand, not man's, on me be laid!"
     Earth frowns below, Heaven weeps above,
     And man is hate, but God is love!

     No Hermits now the wanderer sees,
     Nor chapel with its chestnut-trees;
     A morning dream, a tale that's told,
     The wave of change o'er all has rolled.

     Yet lives the lesson of that day;
     And from its twilight cool and gray
     Comes up a low, sad whisper, "Make
     The truth thine own, for truth's own sake.

     "Why wait to see in thy brief span
     Its perfect flower and fruit in man?
     No saintly touch can save; no balm
     Of healing hath the martyr's palm.

     "Midst soulless forms, and false pretence
     Of spiritual pride and pampered sense,
     A voice saith, 'What is that to thee?
     Be true thyself, and follow Me!

     "In days when throne and altar heard
     The wanton's wish, the bigot's word,
     And pomp of state and ritual show
     Scarce hid the loathsome death below,--

     "Midst fawning priests and courtiers foul,
     The losel swarm of crown and cowl,
     White-robed walked Francois Fenelon,
     Stainless as Uriel in the sun!

     "Yet in his time the stake blazed red,
     The poor were eaten up like bread
     Men knew him not; his garment's hem
     No healing virtue had for them.

     "Alas! no present saint we find;
     The white cymar gleams far behind,
     Revealed in outline vague, sublime,
     Through telescopic mists of time!

     "Trust not in man with passing breath,
     But in the Lord, old Scripture saith;
     The truth which saves thou mayst not blend
     With false professor, faithless friend.

     "Search thine own heart. What paineth thee
     In others in thyself may be;
     All dust is frail, all flesh is weak;
     Be thou the true man thou dost seek!

     "Where now with pain thou treadest, trod
     The whitest of the saints of God!
     To show thee where their feet were set,
     the light which led them shineth yet.

     "The footprints of the life divine,
     Which marked their path, remain in thine;
     And that great Life, transfused in theirs,
     Awaits thy faith, thy love, thy prayers!"

     A lesson which I well may heed,
     A word of fitness to my need;
     So from that twilight cool and gray
     Still saith a voice, or seems to say.

     We rose, and slowly homeward turned,
     While down the west the sunset burned;
     And, in its light, hill, wood, and tide,
     And human forms seemed glorified.

     The village homes transfigured stood,
     And purple bluffs, whose belting wood
     Across the waters leaned to hold
     The yellow leaves like lamps of hold.

     Then spake my friend: "Thy words are true;
     Forever old, forever new,
     These home-seen splendors are the same
     Which over Eden's sunsets came.

     "To these bowed heavens let wood and hill
     Lift voiceless praise and anthem still;
     Fall, warm with blessing, over them,
     Light of the New Jerusalem!

     "Flow on, sweet river, like the stream
     Of John's Apocalyptic dream
     This mapled ridge shall Horeb be,
     Yon green-banked lake our Galilee!

     "Henceforth my heart shall sigh no more
     For olden time and holier shore;
     God's love and blessing, then and there,
     Are now and here and everywhere."

     1851.




TAULER.

     TAULER, the preacher, walked, one autumn day,
     Without the walls of Strasburg, by the Rhine,
     Pondering the solemn Miracle of Life;
     As one who, wandering in a starless night,
     Feels momently the jar of unseen waves,
     And hears the thunder of an unknown sea,
     Breaking along an unimagined shore.

     And as he walked he prayed. Even the same
     Old prayer with which, for half a score of years,
     Morning, and noon, and evening, lip and heart
     Had groaned: "Have pity upon me, Lord!
     Thou seest, while teaching others, I am blind.
     Send me a man who can direct my steps!"

     Then, as he mused, he heard along his path
     A sound as of an old man's staff among
     The dry, dead linden-leaves; and, looking up,
     He saw a stranger, weak, and poor, and old.

     "Peace be unto thee, father!" Tauler said,
     "God give thee a good day!" The old man raised
     Slowly his calm blue eyes. "I thank thee, son;
     But all my days are good, and none are ill."

     Wondering thereat, the preacher spake again,
     "God give thee happy life." The old man smiled,
     "I never am unhappy."

                               Tauler laid
     His hand upon the stranger's coarse gray sleeve
     "Tell me, O father, what thy strange words mean.
     Surely man's days are evil, and his life
     Sad as the grave it leads to."  "Nay, my son,
     Our times are in God's hands, and all our days
     Are as our needs; for shadow as for sun,
     For cold as heat, for want as wealth, alike
     Our thanks are due, since that is best which is;
     And that which is not, sharing not His life,
     Is evil only as devoid of good.
     And for the happiness of which I spake,
     I find it in submission to his will,
     And calm trust in the holy Trinity
     Of Knowledge, Goodness, and Almighty Power."

     Silently wondering, for a little space,
     Stood the great preacher; then he spake as one
     Who, suddenly grappling with a haunting thought
     Which long has followed, whispering through the dark
     Strange terrors, drags it, shrieking, into light
     "What if God's will consign thee hence to Hell?"

     "Then," said the stranger, cheerily, "be it so.
     What Hell may be I know not; this I know,--
     I cannot lose the presence of the Lord.
     One arm, Humility, takes hold upon
     His dear Humanity; the other, Love,
     Clasps his Divinity. So where I go
     He goes; and better fire-walled Hell with Him
     Than golden-gated Paradise without."

     Tears sprang in Tauler's eyes. A sudden light,
     Like the first ray which fell on chaos, clove
     Apart the shadow wherein he had walked
     Darkly at noon. And, as the strange old man
     Went his slow way, until his silver hair
     Set like the white moon where the hills of vine
     Slope to the Rhine, he bowed his head and said
     "My prayer is answered. God hath sent the man
     Long sought, to teach me, by his simple trust,
     Wisdom the weary schoolmen never knew."

     So, entering with a changed and cheerful step
     The city gates, he saw, far down the street,
     A mighty shadow break the light of noon,
     Which tracing backward till its airy lines
     Hardened to stony plinths, he raised his eyes
     O'er broad facade and lofty pediment,
     O'er architrave and frieze and sainted niche,
     Up the stone lace-work chiselled by the wise
     Erwin of Steinbach, dizzily up to where
     In the noon-brightness the great Minster's tower,
     Jewelled with sunbeams on its mural crown,
     Rose like a visible prayer. "Behold!" he said,
     "The stranger's faith made plain before mine eyes.
     As yonder tower outstretches to the earth
     The dark triangle of its shade alone
     When the clear day is shining on its top,
     So, darkness in the pathway of Man's life
     Is but the shadow of God's providence,
     By the great Sun of Wisdom cast thereon;
     And what is dark below is light in Heaven."

     1853.




THE HERMIT OF THE THEBAID.

     O STRONG, upwelling prayers of faith,
     From inmost founts of life ye start,--
     The spirit's pulse, the vital breath
     Of soul and heart!

     From pastoral toil, from traffic's din,
     Alone, in crowds, at home, abroad,
     Unheard of man, ye enter in
     The ear of God.

     Ye brook no forced and measured tasks,
     Nor weary rote, nor formal chains;
     The simple heart, that freely asks
     In love, obtains.

     For man the living temple is
     The mercy-seat and cherubim,
     And all the holy mysteries,
     He bears with him.

     And most avails the prayer of love,
     Which, wordless, shapes itself in needs,
     And wearies Heaven for naught above
     Our common needs.

     Which brings to God's all-perfect will
     That trust of His undoubting child
     Whereby all seeming good and ill
     Are reconciled.

     And, seeking not for special signs
     Of favor, is content to fall
     Within the providence which shines
     And rains on all.

     Alone, the Thebaid hermit leaned
     At noontime o'er the sacred word.
     Was it an angel or a fiend
     Whose voice be heard?

     It broke the desert's hush of awe,
     A human utterance, sweet and mild;
     And, looking up, the hermit saw
     A little child.

     A child, with wonder-widened eyes,
     O'erawed and troubled by the sight
     Of hot, red sands, and brazen skies,
     And anchorite.

     "'What dost thou here, poor man? No shade
     Of cool, green palms, nor grass, nor well,
     Nor corn, nor vines." The hermit said
     "With God I dwell.

     "Alone with Him in this great calm,
     I live not by the outward sense;
     My Nile his love, my sheltering palm
     His providence."

     The child gazed round him. "Does God live
     Here only?--where the desert's rim
     Is green with corn, at morn and eve,
     We pray to Him.

     "My brother tills beside the Nile
     His little field; beneath the leaves
     My sisters sit and spin, the while
     My mother weaves.

     "And when the millet's ripe heads fall,
     And all the bean-field hangs in pod,
     My mother smiles, and, says that all
     Are gifts from God."

     Adown the hermit's wasted cheeks
     Glistened the flow of human tears;
     "Dear Lord!" he said, "Thy angel speaks,
     Thy servant hears."

     Within his arms the child he took,
     And thought of home and life with men;
     And all his pilgrim feet forsook
     Returned again.

     The palmy shadows cool and long,
     The eyes that smiled through lavish locks,
     Home's cradle-hymn and harvest-song,
     And bleat of flocks.

     "O child!" he said, "thou teachest me
     There is no place where God is not;
     That love will make, where'er it be,
     A holy spot."

     He rose from off the desert sand,
     And, leaning on his staff of thorn,
     Went with the young child hand in hand,
     Like night with morn.

     They crossed the desert's burning line,
     And heard the palm-tree's rustling fan,
     The Nile-bird's cry, the low of kine,
     And voice of man.

     Unquestioning, his childish guide
     He followed, as the small hand led
     To where a woman, gentle-eyed,
     Her distaff fed.

     She rose, she clasped her truant boy,
     She thanked the stranger with her eyes;
     The hermit gazed in doubt and joy
     And dumb surprise.

     And to!--with sudden warmth and light
     A tender memory thrilled his frame;
     New-born, the world-lost anchorite
     A man became.

     "O sister of El Zara's race,
     Behold me!--had we not one mother?"
     She gazed into the stranger's face
     "Thou art my brother!"

     "And when to share our evening meal,
     She calls the stranger at the door,
     She says God fills the hands that deal
     Food to the poor."

     "O kin of blood! Thy life of use
     And patient trust is more than mine;
     And wiser than the gray recluse
     This child of thine.

     "For, taught of him whom God hath sent,
     That toil is praise, and love is prayer,
     I come, life's cares and pains content
     With thee to share."

     Even as his foot the threshold crossed,
     The hermit's better life began;
     Its holiest saint the Thebaid lost,
     And found a man!

     1854.




MAUD MULLER.

The recollection of some descendants of a Hessian deserter in the
Revolutionary war bearing the name of Muller doubtless suggested the
somewhat infelicitous title of a New England idyl. The poem had no real
foundation in fact, though a hint of it may have been found in recalling
an incident, trivial in itself, of a journey on the picturesque Maine
seaboard with my sister some years before it was written. We had stopped
to rest our tired horse under the shade of an apple-tree, and refresh
him with water from a little brook which rippled through the stone wall
across the road. A very beautiful young girl in scantest summer attire
was at work in the hay-field, and as we talked with her we noticed that
she strove to hide her bare feet by raking hay over them, blushing as
she did so, through the tan of her cheek and neck.

     MAUD MULLER on a summer's day,
     Raked the meadow sweet with hay.

     Beneath her torn hat glowed the wealth
     Of simple beauty and rustic-health.

     Singing, she wrought, and her merry glee
     The mock-bird echoed from his tree.

     But when she glanced to the far-off town,
     White from its hill-slope looking down,

     The sweet song died, and a vague unrest
     And a nameless longing filled her breast,--

     A wish, that she hardly dared to own,
     For something better than she had known.

     The Judge rode slowly down the lane,
     Smoothing his horse's chestnut mane.

     He drew his bridle in the shade
     Of the apple-trees, to greet the maid,

     And asked a draught from the spring that flowed
     Through the meadow across the road.

     She stooped where the cool spring bubbled up,
     And filled for him her small tin cup,

     And blushed as she gave it, looking down
     On her feet so bare, and her tattered gown.

     "Thanks!" said the Judge; "a sweeter draught
     From a fairer hand was never quaffed."

     He spoke of the grass and flowers and trees,
     Of the singing birds and the humming bees;

     Then talked of the haying, and wondered whether
     The cloud in the west would bring foul weather.

     And Maud forgot her brier-torn gown,
     And her graceful ankles bare and brown;

     And listened, while a pleased surprise
     Looked from her long-lashed hazel eyes.

     At last, like one who for delay
     Seeks a vain excuse, he rode away.

     Maud Muller looked and sighed: "Ah me!
     That I the Judge's bride might be!

     "He would dress me up in silks so fine,
     And praise and toast me at his wine.

     "My father should wear a broadcloth coat;
     My brother should sail a painted boat.

     "I'd dress my mother so grand and gay,
     And the baby should have a new toy each day.

     "And I 'd feed the hungry and clothe the poor,
     And all should bless me who left our door."

     The Judge looked back as he climbed the hill,
     And saw Maud Muller standing still.

     A form more fair, a face more sweet,
     Ne'er hath it been my lot to meet.

     "And her modest answer and graceful air
     Show her wise and good as she is fair.

     "Would she were mine, and I to-day,
     Like her, a harvester of hay;

     "No doubtful balance of rights and wrongs,
     Nor weary lawyers with endless tongues,

     "But low of cattle and song of birds,
     And health and quiet and loving words."

     But he thought of his sisters, proud and cold,
     And his mother, vain of her rank and gold.

     So, closing his heart, the Judge rode on,
     And Maud was left in the field alone.

     But the lawyers smiled that afternoon,
     When he hummed in court an old love-tune;

     And the young girl mused beside the well
     Till the rain on the unraked clover fell.

     He wedded a wife of richest dower,
     Who lived for fashion, as he for power.

     Yet oft, in his marble hearth's bright glow,
     He watched a picture come and go;

     And sweet Maud Muller's hazel eyes
     Looked out in their innocent surprise.

     Oft, when the wine in his glass was red,
     He longed for the wayside well instead;

     And closed his eyes on his garnished rooms
     To dream of meadows and clover-blooms.

     And the proud man sighed, with a secret pain,
     "Ah, that I were free again!

     "Free as when I rode that day,
     Where the barefoot maiden raked her hay."

     She wedded a man unlearned and poor,
     And many children played round her door.

     But care and sorrow, and childbirth pain,
     Left their traces on heart and brain.

     And oft, when the summer sun shone hot
     On the new-mown hay in the meadow lot,

     And she heard the little spring brook fall
     Over the roadside, through the wall,

     In the shade of the apple-tree again
     She saw a rider draw his rein.

     And, gazing down with timid grace,
     She felt his pleased eyes read her face.

     Sometimes her narrow kitchen walls
     Stretched away into stately halls;

     The weary wheel to a spinnet turned,
     The tallow candle an astral burned,

     And for him who sat by the chimney lug,
     Dozing and grumbling o'er pipe and mug,

     A manly form at her side she saw,
     And joy was duty and love was law.

     Then she took up her burden of life again,
     Saying only, "It might have been."

     Alas for maiden, alas for Judge,
     For rich repiner and household drudge!

     God pity them both! and pity us all,
     Who vainly the dreams of youth recall.

     For of all sad words of tongue or pen,
     The saddest are these: "It might have been!"

     Ah, well! for us all some sweet hope lies
     Deeply buried from human eyes;

     And, in the hereafter, angels may
     Roll the stone from its grave away!

     1854.




MARY GARVIN.

     FROM the heart of Waumbek Methna, from the
     lake that never fails,
     Falls the Saco in the green lap of Conway's
     intervales;
     There, in wild and virgin freshness, its waters
     foam and flow,
     As when Darby Field first saw them, two hundred
     years ago.

     But, vexed in all its seaward course with bridges,
     dams, and mills,
     How changed is Saco's stream, how lost its freedom
     of the hills,
     Since travelled Jocelyn, factor Vines, and stately
     Champernoon
     Heard on its banks the gray wolf's howl, the trumpet
     of the loon!

     With smoking axle hot with speed, with steeds of
     fire and steam,
     Wide-waked To-day leaves Yesterday behind him
     like a dream.
     Still, from the hurrying train of Life, fly backward
     far and fast
     The milestones of the fathers, the landmarks of
     the past.

     But human hearts remain unchanged: the sorrow
     and the sin,
     The loves and hopes and fears of old, are to our
     own akin;

     And if, in tales our fathers told, the songs our
     mothers sung,
     Tradition wears a snowy beard, Romance is always
     young.

     O sharp-lined man of traffic, on Saco's banks today!
     O mill-girl watching late and long the shuttle's
     restless play!
     Let, for the once, a listening ear the working hand
     beguile,
     And lend my old Provincial tale, as suits, a tear or
     smile!

              . . . . . . . . . . . . .

     The evening gun had sounded from gray Fort
     Mary's walls;
     Through the forest, like a wild beast, roared and
     plunged the Saco's' falls.

     And westward on the sea-wind, that damp and
     gusty grew,
     Over cedars darkening inland the smokes of Spurwink
     blew.

     On the hearth of Farmer Garvin, blazed the crackling
     walnut log;
     Right and left sat dame and goodman, and between
     them lay the dog,

     Head on paws, and tail slow wagging, and beside
     him on her mat,
     Sitting drowsy in the firelight, winked and purred
     the mottled cat.

     "Twenty years!" said Goodman Garvin, speaking
     sadly, under breath,
     And his gray head slowly shaking, as one who
     speaks of death.

     The goodwife dropped her needles: "It is twenty
     years to-day,
     Since the Indians fell on Saco, and stole our child
     away."

     Then they sank into the silence, for each knew
     the other's thought,
     Of a great and common sorrow, and words were,
     needed not.

     "Who knocks?" cried Goodman Garvin. The
     door was open thrown;
     On two strangers, man and maiden, cloaked and
     furred, the fire-light shone.

     One with courteous gesture lifted the bear-skin
     from his head;
     "Lives here Elkanah Garvin?"  "I am he," the
     goodman said.

     "Sit ye down, and dry and warm ye, for the night
     is chill with rain."
     And the goodwife drew the settle, and stirred the
     fire amain.

     The maid unclasped her cloak-hood, the firelight
     glistened fair
     In her large, moist eyes, and over soft folds of
     dark brown hair.

     Dame Garvin looked upon her: "It is Mary's self
     I see!"
     "Dear heart!" she cried, "now tell me, has my
     child come back to me?"

     "My name indeed is Mary," said the stranger sobbing
     wild;
     "Will you be to me a mother? I am Mary Garvin's child!"

     "She sleeps by wooded Simcoe, but on her dying
     day
     She bade my father take me to her kinsfolk far
     away.

     "And when the priest besought her to do me no
     such wrong,
     She said, 'May God forgive me! I have closed
     my heart too long.'

     "'When I hid me from my father, and shut out
     my mother's call,
     I sinned against those dear ones, and the Father
     of us all.

     "'Christ's love rebukes no home-love, breaks no
     tie of kin apart;
     Better heresy in doctrine, than heresy of heart.

     "'Tell me not the Church must censure: she who
     wept the Cross beside
     Never made her own flesh strangers, nor the claims
     of blood denied;

     "'And if she who wronged her parents, with her
     child atones to them,
     Earthly daughter, Heavenly Mother! thou at least
     wilt not condemn!'

     "So, upon her death-bed lying, my blessed mother
     spake;
     As we come to do her bidding, So receive us for her
     sake."

     "God be praised!" said Goodwife Garvin, "He taketh,
     and He gives;
     He woundeth, but He healeth; in her child our
     daughter lives!"

     "Amen!" the old man answered, as he brushed a
     tear away,
     And, kneeling by his hearthstone, said, with reverence,
     "Let us pray."

     All its Oriental symbols, and its Hebrew pararphrase,
     Warm with earnest life and feeling, rose his prayer
     of love and praise.

     But he started at beholding, as he rose from off
     his knee,
     The stranger cross his forehead with the sign of
     Papistrie.

     "What is this?" cried Farmer Garvin. "Is an English
     Christian's home
     A chapel or a mass-house, that you make the sign
     of Rome?"

     Then the young girl knelt beside him, kissed his
     trembling hand, and cried:
     Oh, forbear to chide my father; in that faith my
     mother died!

     "On her wooden cross at Simcoe the dews and
     sunshine fall,
     As they fall on Spurwink's graveyard; and the
     dear God watches all!"

     The old man stroked the fair head that rested on
     his knee;
     "Your words, dear child," he answered, "are God's
     rebuke to me.

     "Creed and rite perchance may differ, yet our
     faith and hope be one.
     Let me be your father's father, let him be to me
     a son."

     When the horn, on Sabbath morning, through the
     still and frosty air,
     From Spurwink, Pool, and Black Point, called to
     sermon and to prayer,

     To the goodly house of worship, where, in order
     due and fit,
     As by public vote directed, classed and ranked the
     people sit;

     Mistress first and goodwife after, clerkly squire
     before the clown,
     "From the brave coat, lace-embroidered, to the gray
     frock, shading down;"

     From the pulpit read the preacher, "Goodman
     Garvin and his wife
     Fain would thank the Lord, whose kindness has
     followed them through life,

     "For the great and crowning mercy, that their
     daughter, from the wild,
     Where she rests (they hope in God's peace), has
     sent to them her child;

     "And the prayers of all God's people they ask,
     that they may prove
     Not unworthy, through their weakness, of such
     special proof of love."

     As the preacher prayed, uprising, the aged couple
     stood,
     And the fair Canadian also, in her modest maiden-
     hood.

     Thought the elders, grave and doubting, "She is
     Papist born and bred;"
     Thought the young men, "'T is an angel in Mary
     Garvin's stead!"




THE RANGER.

Originally published as Martha Mason; a Song of the Old
French War.

     ROBERT RAWLIN!--Frosts were falling
     When the ranger's horn was calling
     Through the woods to Canada.

     Gone the winter's sleet and snowing,
     Gone the spring-time's bud and blowing,
     Gone the summer's harvest mowing,
     And again the fields are gray.
     Yet away, he's away!
     Faint and fainter hope is growing
     In the hearts that mourn his stay.

     Where the lion, crouching high on
     Abraham's rock with teeth of iron,
     Glares o'er wood and wave away,
     Faintly thence, as pines far sighing,
     Or as thunder spent and dying,
     Come the challenge and replying,
     Come the sounds of flight and fray.
     Well-a-day! Hope and pray!
     Some are living, some are lying
     In their red graves far away.

     Straggling rangers, worn with dangers,
     Homeward faring, weary strangers
     Pass the farm-gate on their way;
     Tidings of the dead and living,
     Forest march and ambush, giving,
     Till the maidens leave their weaving,
     And the lads forget their play.
     "Still away, still away!"
     Sighs a sad one, sick with grieving,
     "Why does Robert still delay!"

     Nowhere fairer, sweeter, rarer,
     Does the golden-locked fruit bearer
     Through his painted woodlands stray,
     Than where hillside oaks and beeches
     Overlook the long, blue reaches,
     Silver coves and pebbled beaches,
     And green isles of Casco Bay;
     Nowhere day, for delay,
     With a tenderer look beseeches,
     "Let me with my charmed earth stay."

     On the grain-lands of the mainlands
     Stands the serried corn like train-bands,
     Plume and pennon rustling gay;
     Out at sea, the islands wooded,
     Silver birches, golden-hooded,
     Set with maples, crimson-blooded,
     White sea-foam and sand-hills gray,
     Stretch away, far away.
     Dim and dreamy, over-brooded
     By the hazy autumn day.

     Gayly chattering to the clattering
     Of the brown nuts downward pattering,
     Leap the squirrels, red and gray.
     On the grass-land, on the fallow,
     Drop the apples, red and yellow;
     Drop the russet pears and mellow,
     Drop the red leaves all the day.
     And away, swift away,
     Sun and cloud, o'er hill and hollow
     Chasing, weave their web of play.

     "Martha Mason, Martha Mason,
     Prithee tell us of the reason
     Why you mope at home to-day
     Surely smiling is not sinning;
     Leave, your quilling, leave your spinning;
     What is all your store of linen,
     If your heart is never gay?
     Come away, come away!
     Never yet did sad beginning
     Make the task of life a play."

     Overbending, till she's blending
     With the flaxen skein she's tending
     Pale brown tresses smoothed away
     From her face of patient sorrow,
     Sits she, seeking but to borrow,
     From the trembling hope of morrow,
     Solace for the weary day.
     "Go your way, laugh and play;
     Unto Him who heeds the sparrow
     And the lily, let me pray."

     "With our rally, rings the valley,--
     Join us!" cried the blue-eyed Nelly;
     "Join us!" cried the laughing May,
     "To the beach we all are going,
     And, to save the task of rowing,
     West by north the wind is blowing,
     Blowing briskly down the bay
     Come away, come away!
     Time and tide are swiftly flowing,
     Let us take them while we may!

     "Never tell us that you'll fail us,
     Where the purple beach-plum mellows
     On the bluffs so wild and gray.
     Hasten, for the oars are falling;
     Hark, our merry mates are calling;
     Time it is that we were all in,
     Singing tideward down the bay!"
     "Nay, nay, let me stay;
     Sore and sad for Robert Rawlin
     Is my heart," she said, "to-day."

     "Vain your calling for Rob Rawlin
     Some red squaw his moose-meat's broiling,
     Or some French lass, singing gay;
     Just forget as he's forgetting;
     What avails a life of fretting?
     If some stars must needs be setting,
     Others rise as good as they."
     "Cease, I pray; go your way!"
     Martha cries, her eyelids wetting;
     "Foul and false the words you say!"

     "Martha Mason, hear to reason!--
     Prithee, put a kinder face on!"
     "Cease to vex me," did she say;
     "Better at his side be lying,
     With the mournful pine-trees sighing,
     And the wild birds o'er us crying,
     Than to doubt like mine a prey;
     While away, far away,
     Turns my heart, forever trying
     Some new hope for each new day.

     "When the shadows veil the meadows,
     And the sunset's golden ladders
     Sink from twilight's walls of gray,--
     From the window of my dreaming,
     I can see his sickle gleaming,
     Cheery-voiced, can hear him teaming
     Down the locust-shaded way;
     But away, swift away,
     Fades the fond, delusive seeming,
     And I kneel again to pray.

     "When the growing dawn is showing,
     And the barn-yard cock is crowing,
     And the horned moon pales away
     From a dream of him awaking,
     Every sound my heart is making
     Seems a footstep of his taking;
     Then I hush the thought, and say,
     'Nay, nay, he's away!'
     Ah! my heart, my heart is breaking
     For the dear one far away."

     Look up, Martha! worn and swarthy,
     Glows a face of manhood worthy
     "Robert!"  "Martha!" all they say.
     O'er went wheel and reel together,
     Little cared the owner whither;
     Heart of lead is heart of feather,
     Noon of night is noon of day!
     Come away, come away!
     When such lovers meet each other,
     Why should prying idlers stay?

     Quench the timber's fallen embers,
     Quench the recd leaves in December's
     Hoary rime and chilly spray.

     But the hearth shall kindle clearer,
     Household welcomes sound sincerer,
     Heart to loving heart draw nearer,
     When the bridal bells shall say:
     "Hope and pray, trust alway;
     Life is sweeter, love is dearer,
     For the trial and delay!"

     1856.




THE GARRISON OF CAPE ANN.

     FROM the hills of home forth looking, far beneath
     the tent-like span
     Of the sky, I see the white gleam of the headland
     of Cape Ann.
     Well I know its coves and beaches to the ebb-tide
     glimmering down,
     And the white-walled hamlet children of its ancient
     fishing town.

     Long has passed the summer morning, and its
     memory waxes old,
     When along yon breezy headlands with a pleasant
     friend I strolled.
     Ah! the autumn sun is shining, and the ocean
     wind blows cool,
     And the golden-rod and aster bloom around thy
     grave, Rantoul!

     With the memory of that morning by the summer
     sea I blend
     A wild and wondrous story, by the younger Mather
     penned,
     In that quaint Magnalia Christi, with all strange
     and marvellous things,
     Heaped up huge and undigested, like the chaos
     Ovid sings.

     Dear to me these far, faint glimpses of the dual
     life of old,
     Inward, grand with awe and reverence; outward,
     mean and coarse and cold;
     Gleams of mystic beauty playing over dull and
     vulgar clay,
     Golden-threaded fancies weaving in a web of
     hodden gray.

     The great eventful Present hides the Past; but
     through the din
     Of its loud life hints and echoes from the life
     behind steal in;
     And the lore of homeland fireside, and the legendary
     rhyme,
     Make the task of duty lighter which the true man
     owes his time.

     So, with something of the feeling which the Covenanter
     knew,
     When with pious chisel wandering Scotland's
     moorland graveyards through,
     From the graves of old traditions I part the black-
     berry-vines,
     Wipe the moss from off the headstones, and retouch
     the faded lines.

     Where the sea-waves back and forward, hoarse
     with rolling pebbles, ran,
     The garrison-house stood watching on the gray
     rocks of Cape Ann;
     On its windy site uplifting gabled roof and palisade,
     And rough walls of unhewn timber with the moonlight
     overlaid.

     On his slow round walked the sentry, south and
     eastward looking forth
     O'er a rude and broken coast-line, white with
     breakers stretching north,--
     Wood and rock and gleaming sand-drift, jagged
     capes, with bush and tree,
     Leaning inland from the smiting of the wild and
     gusty sea.

     Before the deep-mouthed chimney, dimly lit by
     dying brands,
     Twenty soldiers sat and waited, with their muskets
     in their hands;
     On the rough-hewn oaken table the venison haunch
     was shared,
     And the pewter tankard circled slowly round from
     beard to beard.

     Long they sat and talked together,--talked of
     wizards Satan-sold;
     Of all ghostly sights and noises,--signs and wonders
     manifold;
     Of the spectre-ship of Salem, with the dead men
     in her shrouds,
     Sailing sheer above the water, in the loom of morning
     clouds;

     Of the marvellous valley hidden in the depths of
     Gloucester woods,
     Full of plants that love the summer,--blooms of
     warmer latitudes;
     Where the Arctic birch is braided by the tropic's
     flowery vines,
     And the white magnolia-blossoms star the twilight
     of the pines!

     But their voices sank yet lower, sank to husky
     tones of fear,
     As they spake of present tokens of the powers of
     evil near;
     Of a spectral host, defying stroke of steel and aim
     of gun;
     Never yet was ball to slay them in the mould of
     mortals run.

     Thrice, with plumes and flowing scalp-locks, from
     the midnight wood they came,--
     Thrice around the block-house marching, met, unharmed,
     its volleyed flame;
     Then, with mocking laugh and gesture, sunk in
     earth or lost in air,
     All the ghostly wonder vanished, and the moonlit
     sands lay bare.

     Midnight came; from out the forest moved a
     dusky mass that soon
     Grew to warriors, plumed and painted, grimly
     marching in the moon.
     "Ghosts or witches," said the captain, "thus I foil
     the Evil One!"
     And he rammed a silver button, from his doublet,
     down his gun.

     Once again the spectral horror moved the guarded
     wall about;
     Once again the levelled muskets through the palisades
     flashed out,
     With that deadly aim the squirrel on his tree-top
     might not shun,
     Nor the beach-bird seaward flying with his slant
     wing to the sun.

     Like the idle rain of summer sped the harmless
     shower of lead.
     With a laugh of fierce derision, once again the
     phantoms fled;
     Once again, without a shadow on the sands the
     moonlight lay,
     And the white smoke curling through it drifted
     slowly down the bay!

     "God preserve us!" said the captain; "never
     mortal foes were there;
     They have vanished with their leader, Prince and
     Power of the air!
     Lay aside your useless weapons; skill and prowess
     naught avail;
     They who do the Devil's service wear their master's
     coat of mail!"

     So the night grew near to cock-crow, when again
     a warning call
     Roused the score of weary soldiers watching round
     the dusky hall
     And they looked to flint and priming, and they
     longed for break of day;
     But the captain closed his Bible: "Let us cease
     from man, and pray!"

     To the men who went before us, all the unseen
     powers seemed near,
     And their steadfast strength of courage struck its
     roots in holy fear.
     Every hand forsook the musket, every head was
     bowed and bare,
     Every stout knee pressed the flag-stones, as the
     captain led in prayer.

     Ceased thereat the mystic marching of the spectres
     round the wall,
     But a sound abhorred, unearthly, smote the ears
     and hearts of all,--
     Howls of rage and shrieks of anguish! Never
     after mortal man
     Saw the ghostly leaguers marching round the
     block-house of Cape Ann.

     So to us who walk in summer through the cool and
     sea-blown town,
     From the childhood of its people comes the solemn
     legend down.
     Not in vain the ancient fiction, in whose moral
     lives the youth
     And the fitness and the freshness of an undecaying
     truth.

     Soon or late to all our dwellings come the spectres
     of the mind,
     Doubts and fears and dread forebodings, in the
     darkness undefined;
     Round us throng the grim projections of the heart
     and of the brain,
     And our pride of strength is weakness, and the
     cunning hand is vain.

     In the dark we cry like children; and no answer
     from on high
     Breaks the crystal spheres of silence, and no white
     wings downward fly;
     But the heavenly help we pray for comes to faith,
     and not to sight,
     And our prayers themselves drive backward all the
     spirits of the night!

     1857.




THE GIFT OF TRITEMIUS.

     TRITEMIUS of Herbipolis, one day,
     While kneeling at the altar's foot to pray,
     Alone with God, as was his pious choice,
     Heard from without a miserable voice,
     A sound which seemed of all sad things to tell,
     As of a lost soul crying out of hell.

     Thereat the Abbot paused; the chain whereby
     His thoughts went upward broken by that cry;
     And, looking from the casement, saw below
     A wretched woman, with gray hair a-flow,
     And withered hands held up to him, who cried
     For alms as one who might not be denied.

     She cried, "For the dear love of Him who gave
     His life for ours, my child from bondage save,--
     My beautiful, brave first-born, chained with slaves
     In the Moor's galley, where the sun-smit waves
     Lap the white walls of Tunis!"--"What I can
     I give," Tritemius said, "my prayers."--"O man
     Of God!" she cried, for grief had made her bold,
     "Mock me not thus; I ask not prayers, but gold.
     Words will not serve me, alms alone suffice;
     Even while I speak perchance my first-born dies."

     "Woman!" Tritemius answered, "from our door
     None go unfed, hence are we always poor;
     A single soldo is our only store.
     Thou hast our prayers;--what can we give thee
     more?"

     "Give me," she said, "the silver candlesticks
     On either side of the great crucifix.
     God well may spare them on His errands sped,
     Or He can give you golden ones instead."

     Then spake Tritemius, "Even as thy word,
     Woman, so be it! Our most gracious Lord,
     Who loveth mercy more than sacrifice,
     Pardon me if a human soul I prize
     Above the gifts upon his altar piled!
     Take what thou askest, and redeem thy child."

     But his hand trembled as the holy alms
     He placed within the beggar's eager palms;
     And as she vanished down the linden shade,
     He bowed his head and for forgiveness prayed.
     So the day passed, and when the twilight came
     He woke to find the chapel all aflame,
     And, dumb with grateful wonder, to behold
     Upon the altar candlesticks of gold!

     1857.




SKIPPER IRESON'S RIDE.

In the valuable and carefully prepared History of Marblehead, published
in 1879 by Samuel Roads, Jr., it is stated that the crew of Captain
Ireson, rather than himself, were responsible for the abandonment of the
disabled vessel. To screen themselves they charged their captain with
the crime. In view of this the writer of the ballad addressed the
following letter to the historian:--

OAK KNOLL, DANVERS, 5 mo. 18, 1880.
MY DEAR FRIEND: I heartily thank thee for a copy of thy History of
Marblehead. I have read it with great interest and think good use has
been made of the abundant material. No town in Essex County has a record
more honorable than Marblehead; no one has done more to develop the
industrial interests of our New England seaboard, and certainly none
have given such evidence of self-sacrificing patriotism. I am glad the
story of it has been at last told, and told so well. I have now no doubt
that thy version of Skipper Ireson's ride is the correct one. My verse
was founded solely on a fragment of rhyme which I heard from one of my
early schoolmates, a native of Marblehead. I supposed the story to which
it referred dated back at least a century. I knew nothing of the
participators, and the narrative of the ballad was pure fancy. I am glad
for the sake of truth and justice that the real facts are given in thy
book. I certainly would not knowingly do injustice to any one, dead or
living.

I am very truly thy friend,
JOHN G. WHITTIER.


     OF all the rides since, the birth of time,
     Told in story or sung in rhyme,--
     On Apuleius's Golden Ass,
     Or one-eyed Calendar's horse of brass;
     Witch astride of a human back,
     Islam's prophet on Al-Borak,--
     The strangest ride that ever was sped
     Was Ireson's, out from Marblehead!
     Old Floyd Ireson, for his hard heart,
     Tarred and feathered and carried in a cart
     By the women of Marblehead!
     Body of turkey, head of owl,
     Wings a-droop like a rained-on fowl,
     Feathered and ruffled in every part,
     Skipper Ireson stood in the cart.
     Scores of women, old and young,
     Strong of muscle, and glib of tongue,
     Pushed and pulled up the rocky lane,
     Shouting and singing the shrill refrain
     "Here's Flud Oirson, fur his horrd horrt,
     Torr'd an' futherr'd an' corr'd in a corrt
     By the women o' Morble'ead!"

     Wrinkled scolds with hands on hips,
     Girls in bloom of cheek and lips,
     Wild-eyed, free-limbed, such as chase
     Bacchus round some antique vase,
     Brief of skirt, with ankles bare,
     Loose of kerchief and loose of hair,
     With conch-shells blowing and fish-horns' twang,
     Over and over the Manads sang
     "Here's Flud Oirson, fur his horrd horrt,
     Torr'd an' futherr'd an dorr'd in a corrt
     By the women o' Morble'ead!"

     Small pity for him!--He sailed away
     From a leaking ship, in Chaleur Bay,--
     Sailed away from a sinking wreck,
     With his own town's-people on her deck!
     "Lay by! lay by!" they called to him.
     Back he answered, "Sink or swim!
     Brag of your catch of fish again!"
     And off he sailed through the fog and rain!
     Old Floyd Ireson, for his hard heart,
     Tarred and feathered and carried in a cart
     By the women of Marblehead!

     Fathoms deep in dark Chaleur
     That wreck shall lie forevermore.
     Mother and sister, wife and maid,
     Looked from the rocks of Marblehead
     Over the moaning and rainy sea,--
     Looked for the coming that might not be!
     What did the winds and the sea-birds say
     Of the cruel captain who sailed away?--
     Old Floyd Ireson, for his hard heart,
     Tarred and feathered and carried in a cart
     By the women of Marblehead!

     Through the street, on either side,
     Up flew windows, doors swung wide;
     Sharp-tongued spinsters, old wives gray,
     Treble lent the fish-horn's bray.
     Sea-worn grandsires, cripple-bound,
     Hulks of old sailors run aground,
     Shook head, and fist, and hat, and cane,
     And cracked with curses the hoarse refrain
     "Here's Flud Oirson, fur his horrd horrt,
     Torr'd an' futherr'd an' corr'd in a corrt
     By the women o''Morble'ead!"

     Sweetly along the Salem road
     Bloom of orchard and lilac showed.
     Little the wicked skipper knew
     Of the fields so green and the sky so blue.
     Riding there in his sorry trim,
     Like to Indian idol glum and grim,
     Scarcely he seemed the sound to hear
     Of voices shouting, far and near
     "Here's Flud Oirson, fur his horrd horrt,
     Torr'd an' futherr'd an' corr'd in a corrt
     By the women o' Morble'ead!"

     "Hear me, neighbors!" at last he cried,--
     "What to me is this noisy ride?
     What is the shame that clothes the skin
     To the nameless horror that lives within?
     Waking or sleeping, I see a wreck,
     And hear a cry from a reeling deck!
     Hate me and curse me,--I only dread
     The hand of God and the face of the dead!"
     Said old Floyd Ireson, for his hard heart,
     Tarred and feathered and carried in a cart
     By the women of Marblehead!

     Then the wife of the skipper lost at sea
     Said, "God has touched him! why should we?"
     Said an old wife mourning her only son,
     "Cut the rogue's tether and let him run!"
     So with soft relentings and rude excuse,
     Half scorn, half pity, they cut him loose,
     And gave him a cloak to hide him in,
     And left him alone with his shame and sin.
     Poor Floyd Ireson, for his hard heart,
     Tarred and feathered and carried in a cart
     By the women of Marblehead!

     1857.




THE SYCAMORES.

Hugh Tallant was the first Irish resident of Haverhill, Mass. He planted
the button-wood trees on the bank of the river below the village in the
early part of the seventeenth century. Unfortunately this noble avenue
is now nearly destroyed.

     IN the outskirts of the village,
     On the river's winding shores,
     Stand the Occidental plane-trees,
     Stand the ancient sycamores.

     One long century hath been numbered,
     And another half-way told,
     Since the rustic Irish gleeman
     Broke for them the virgin mould.

     Deftly set to Celtic music,
     At his violin's sound they grew,
     Through the moonlit eves of summer,
     Making Amphion's fable true.

     Rise again, then poor Hugh Tallant
     Pass in jerkin green along,
     With thy eyes brimful of laughter,
     And thy mouth as full of song.

     Pioneer of Erin's outcasts,
     With his fiddle and his pack;
     Little dreamed the village Saxons
     Of the myriads at his back.

     How he wrought with spade and fiddle,
     Delved by day and sang by night,
     With a hand that never wearied,
     And a heart forever light,--

     Still the gay tradition mingles
     With a record grave and drear,
     Like the rollic air of Cluny,
     With the solemn march of Mear.

     When the box-tree, white with blossoms,
     Made the sweet May woodlands glad,
     And the Aronia by the river
     Lighted up the swarming shad,

     And the bulging nets swept shoreward,
     With their silver-sided haul,
     Midst the shouts of dripping fishers,
     He was merriest of them all.

     When, among the jovial huskers,
     Love stole in at Labor's side,
     With the lusty airs of England,
     Soft his Celtic measures vied.

     Songs of love and wailing lyke--wake,
     And the merry fair's carouse;
     Of the wild Red Fox of Erin
     And the Woman of Three Cows,

     By the blazing hearths of winter,
     Pleasant seemed his simple tales,
     Midst the grimmer Yorkshire legends
     And the mountain myths of Wales.

     How the souls in Purgatory
     Scrambled up from fate forlorn,
     On St. Eleven's sackcloth ladder,
     Slyly hitched to Satan's horn.

     Of the fiddler who at Tara
     Played all night to ghosts of kings;
     Of the brown dwarfs, and the fairies
     Dancing in their moorland rings.

     Jolliest of our birds of singing,
     Best he loved the Bob-o-link.
     "Hush!" he 'd say, "the tipsy fairies
     Hear the little folks in drink!"

     Merry-faced, with spade and fiddle,
     Singing through the ancient town,
     Only this, of poor Hugh Tallant,
     Hath Tradition handed down.

     Not a stone his grave discloses;
     But if yet his spirit walks,
     'T is beneath the trees he planted,
     And when Bob-o-Lincoln talks;

     Green memorials of the gleeman I
     Linking still the river-shores,
     With their shadows cast by sunset,
     Stand Hugh Tallant's sycamores!

     When the Father of his Country
     Through the north-land riding came,
     And the roofs were starred with banners,
     And the steeples rang acclaim,--

     When each war-scarred Continental,
     Leaving smithy, mill, and farm,
     Waved his rusted sword in welcome,
     And shot off his old king's arm,--

     Slowly passed that August Presence
     Down the thronged and shouting street;
     Village girls as white as angels,
     Scattering flowers around his feet.

     Midway, where the plane-tree's shadow
     Deepest fell, his rein he drew
     On his stately head, uncovered,
     Cool and soft the west-wind blew.

     And he stood up in his stirrups,
     Looking up and looking down
     On the hills of Gold and Silver
     Rimming round the little town,--

     On the river, full of sunshine,
     To the lap of greenest vales
     Winding down from wooded headlands,
     Willow-skirted, white with sails.

     And he said, the landscape sweeping
     Slowly with his ungloved hand,
     "I have seen no prospect fairer
     In this goodly Eastern land."

     Then the bugles of his escort
     Stirred to life the cavalcade
     And that head, so bare and stately,
     Vanished down the depths of shade.

     Ever since, in town and farm-house,
     Life has had its ebb and flow;
     Thrice hath passed the human harvest
     To its garner green and low.

     But the trees the gleeman planted,
     Through the changes, changeless stand;
     As the marble calm of Tadmor
     Mocks the desert's shifting sand.

     Still the level moon at rising
     Silvers o'er each stately shaft;
     Still beneath them, half in shadow,
     Singing, glides the pleasure craft;

     Still beneath them, arm-enfolded,
     Love and Youth together stray;
     While, as heart to heart beats faster,
     More and more their feet delay.

     Where the ancient cobbler, Keezar,
     On the open hillside wrought,
     Singing, as he drew his stitches,
     Songs his German masters taught,

     Singing, with his gray hair floating
     Round his rosy ample face,--
     Now a thousand Saxon craftsmen
     Stitch and hammer in his place.

     All the pastoral lanes so grassy
     Now are Traffic's dusty streets;
     From the village, grown a city,
     Fast the rural grace retreats.

     But, still green, and tall, and stately,
     On the river's winding shores,
     Stand the Occidental plane-trees,
     Stand, Hugh Taliant's sycamores.

     1857.




THE PIPES AT LUCKNOW.

An incident of the Sepoy mutiny.

     PIPES of the misty moorlands,
     Voice of the glens and hills;
     The droning of the torrents,
     The treble of the rills!
     Not the braes of broom and heather,
     Nor the mountains dark with rain,
     Nor maiden bower, nor border tower,
     Have heard your sweetest strain!

     Dear to the Lowland reaper,
     And plaided mountaineer,--
     To the cottage and the castle
     The Scottish pipes are dear;--
     Sweet sounds the ancient pibroch
     O'er mountain, loch, and glade;
     But the sweetest of all music
     The pipes at Lucknow played.

     Day by day the Indian tiger
     Louder yelled, and nearer crept;
     Round and round the jungle-serpent
     Near and nearer circles swept.
     "Pray for rescue, wives and mothers,--
     Pray to-day!" the soldier said;
     "To-morrow, death's between us
     And the wrong and shame we dread."

     Oh, they listened, looked, and waited,
     Till their hope became despair;
     And the sobs of low bewailing
     Filled the pauses of their prayer.
     Then up spake a Scottish maiden,
     With her ear unto the ground
     "Dinna ye hear it?--dinna ye hear it?
     The pipes o' Havelock sound!"

     Hushed the wounded man his groaning;
     Hushed the wife her little ones;
     Alone they heard the drum-roll
     And the roar of Sepoy guns.
     But to sounds of home and childhood
     The Highland ear was true;--
     As her mother's cradle-crooning
     The mountain pipes she knew.

     Like the march of soundless music
     Through the vision of the seer,
     More of feeling than of hearing,
     Of the heart than of the ear,
     She knew the droning pibroch,
     She knew the Campbell's call
     "Hark! hear ye no' MacGregor's,
     The grandest o' them all!"

     Oh, they listened, dumb and breathless,
     And they caught the sound at last;
     Faint and far beyond the Goomtee
     Rose and fell the piper's blast
     Then a burst of wild thanksgiving
     Mingled woman's voice and man's;
     "God be praised!--the march of Havelock!
     The piping of the clans!"

     Louder, nearer, fierce as vengeance,
     Sharp and shrill as swords at strife,
     Came the wild MacGregor's clan-call,
     Stinging all the air to life.
     But when the far-off dust-cloud
     To plaided legions grew,
     Full tenderly and blithesomely
     The pipes of rescue blew!

     Round the silver domes of Lucknow,
     Moslem mosque and Pagan shrine,
     Breathed the air to Britons dearest,
     The air of Auld Lang Syne.
     O'er the cruel roll of war-drums
     Rose that sweet and homelike strain;
     And the tartan clove the turban,
     As the Goomtee cleaves the plain.

     Dear to the corn-land reaper
     And plaided mountaineer,--
     To the cottage and the castle
     The piper's song is dear.
     Sweet sounds the Gaelic pibroch
     O'er mountain, glen, and glade;
     But the sweetest of all music
     The Pipes at Lucknow played!

     1858.




TELLING THE BEES.

A remarkable custom, brought from the Old Country, formerly prevailed
in the rural districts of New England. On the death of a member of the
family, the bees were at once informed of the event, and their hives
dressed in mourning. This ceremonial was supposed to be necessary to
prevent the swarms from leaving their hives and seeking a new home.

     HERE is the place; right over the hill
     Runs the path I took;
     You can see the gap in the old wall still,
     And the stepping-stones in the shallow brook.

     There is the house, with the gate red-barred,
     And the poplars tall;
     And the barn's brown length, and the cattle-yard,
     And the white horns tossing above the wall.

     There are the beehives ranged in the sun;
     And down by the brink
     Of the brook are her poor flowers, weed-o'errun,
     Pansy and daffodil, rose and pink.

     A year has gone, as the tortoise goes,
     Heavy and slow;
     And the same rose blooms, and the same sun glows,
     And the same brook sings of a year ago.

     There's the same sweet clover-smell in the breeze;
     And the June sun warm
     Tangles his wings of fire in the trees,
     Setting, as then, over Fernside farm.

     I mind me how with a lover's care
     From my Sunday coat
     I brushed off the burrs, and smoothed my hair,
     And cooled at the brookside my brow and
     throat.

     Since we parted, a month had passed,--
     To love, a year;
     Down through the beeches I looked at last
     On the little red gate and the well-sweep near.

     I can see it all now,--the slantwise rain
     Of light through the leaves,
     The sundown's blaze on her window-pane,
     The bloom of her roses under the eaves.

     Just the same as a month before,--
     The house and the trees,
     The barn's brown gable, the vine by the door,--
     Nothing changed but the hives of bees.

     Before them, under the garden wall,
     Forward and back,
     Went drearily singing the chore-girl small,
     Draping each hive with a shred of black.

     Trembling, I listened: the summer sun
     Had the chill of snow;
     For I knew she was telling the bees of one
     Gone on the journey we all must go.

     Then I said to myself, "My Mary weeps
     For the dead to-day;
     Haply her blind old grandsire sleeps
     The fret and the pain of his age away."

     But her dog whined low; on the doorway sill,
     With his cane to his chin,
     The old man sat; and the chore-girl still
     Sung to the bees stealing out and in.

     And the song she was singing ever since
     In my ear sounds on:--
     "Stay at home, pretty bees, fly not hence!
     Mistress Mary is dead and gone!"

     1858.




THE SWAN SONG OF PARSON AVERY.

In Young's Chronicles of Massachusetts Bay front 1623 to 1636 may be
found Anthony Thacher's Narrative of his Shipwreck. Thacher was Avery's
companion and survived to tell the tale. Mather's Magnalia, III. 2,
gives further Particulars of Parson Avery's End, and suggests the title
of the poem.

     WHEN the reaper's task was ended, and the
     summer wearing late,
     Parson Avery sailed from Newbury, with his wife
     and children eight,
     Dropping down the river-harbor in the shallop
     "Watch and Wait."

     Pleasantly lay the clearings in the mellow summer-
     morn,
     With the newly planted orchards dropping their
     fruits first-born,
     And the home-roofs like brown islands amid a sea
     of corn.

     Broad meadows reached out 'seaward the tided
     creeks between,
     And hills rolled wave-like inland, with oaks and
     walnuts green;--
     A fairer home, a--goodlier land, his eyes had never
     seen.

     Yet away sailed Parson Avery, away where duty led,
     And the voice of God seemed calling, to break the
     living bread
     To the souls of fishers starving on the rocks of
     Marblehead.

     All day they sailed: at nightfall the pleasant land-
     breeze died,
     The blackening sky, at midnight, its starry lights
     denied,
     And far and low the thunder of tempest prophesied.

     Blotted out were all the coast-lines, gone were rock,
     and wood, and sand;
     Grimly anxious stood the skipper with the rudder
     in his hand,
     And questioned of the darkness what was sea and
     what was land.

     And the preacher heard his dear ones, nestled
     round him, weeping sore,
     "Never heed, my little children! Christ is walking
     on before;
     To the pleasant land of heaven, where the sea shall
     be no more."

     All at once the great cloud parted, like a curtain
     drawn aside,
     To let down the torch of lightning on the terror
     far and wide;
     And the thunder and the whirlwind together smote
     the tide.

     There was wailing in the shallop, woman's wail
     and man's despair,
     A crash of breaking timbers on the rocks so sharp
     and bare,
     And, through it all, the murmur of Father Avery's
     prayer.

     From his struggle in the darkness with the wild
     waves and the blast,
     On a rock, where every billow broke above him as
     it passed,
     Alone, of all his household, the man of God was
     cast.

     There a comrade heard him praying, in the pause
     of wave and wind
     "All my own have gone before me, and I linger
     just behind;
     Not for life I ask, but only for the rest Thy
     ransomed find!

     "In this night of death I challenge the promise of
     Thy word!--
     Let me see the great salvation of which mine ears
     have heard!--
     Let me pass from hence forgiven, through the
     grace of Christ, our Lord!

     "In the baptism of these waters wash white my
     every sin,
     And let me follow up to Thee my household and
     my kin!
     Open the sea-gate of Thy heaven, and let me enter
     in!"

     When the Christian sings his death-song, all the
     listening heavens draw near,
     And the angels, leaning over the walls of crystal,
     hear
     How the notes so faint and broken swell to music
     in God's ear.

     The ear of God was open to His servant's last
     request;
     As the strong wave swept him downward the sweet
     hymn upward pressed,
     And the soul of Father Avery went, singing, to its
     rest.

     There was wailing on the mainland, from the rocks
     of Marblehead;
     In the stricken church of Newbury the notes of
     prayer were read;
     And long, by board and hearthstone, the living
     mourned the dead.

     And still the fishers outbound, or scudding from
     the squall,
     With grave and reverent faces, the ancient tale
     recall,
     When they see the white waves breaking on the
     Rock of Avery's Fall!

     1808.




THE DOUBLE-HEADED SNAKE OF NEWBURY.

"Concerning ye Amphisbaena, as soon as I received your commands, I made
diligent inquiry: . . . he assures me yt it had really two heads, one
at each end; two mouths, two stings or tongues."--REV. CHRISTOPHER
TOPPAN to COTTON MATHER.

     FAR away in the twilight time
     Of every people, in every clime,
     Dragons and griffins and monsters dire,
     Born of water, and air, and fire,
     Or nursed, like the Python, in the mud
     And ooze of the old Deucalion flood,
     Crawl and wriggle and foam with rage,
     Through dusk tradition and ballad age.
     So from the childhood of Newbury town
     And its time of fable the tale comes down
     Of a terror which haunted bush and brake,
     The Amphisbaena, the Double Snake!

     Thou who makest the tale thy mirth,
     Consider that strip of Christian earth
     On the desolate shore of a sailless sea,
     Full of terror and mystery,
     Half redeemed from the evil hold
     Of the wood so dreary, and dark, and old,
     Which drank with its lips of leaves the dew
     When Time was young, and the world was new,
     And wove its shadows with sun and moon,
     Ere the stones of Cheops were squared and hewn.
     Think of the sea's dread monotone,
     Of the mournful wail from the pine-wood blown,
     Of the strange, vast splendors that lit the North,
     Of the troubled throes of the quaking earth,
     And the dismal tales the Indian told,
     Till the settler's heart at his hearth grew cold,
     And he shrank from the tawny wizard boasts,
     And the hovering shadows seemed full of ghosts,
     And above, below, and on every side,
     The fear of his creed seemed verified;--
     And think, if his lot were now thine own,
     To grope with terrors nor named nor known,
     How laxer muscle and weaker nerve
     And a feebler faith thy need might serve;
     And own to thyself the wonder more
     That the snake had two heads, and not a score!

     Whether he lurked in the Oldtown fen
     Or the gray earth-flax of the Devil's Den,
     Or swam in the wooded Artichoke,
     Or coiled by the Northman's Written Rock,
     Nothing on record is left to show;
     Only the fact that he lived, we know,
     And left the cast of a double head
     In the scaly mask which he yearly shed.
     For he carried a head where his tail should be,
     And the two, of course, could never agree,
     But wriggled about with main and might,
     Now to the left and now to the right;
     Pulling and twisting this way and that,
     Neither knew what the other was at.

     A snake with two beads, lurking so near!
     Judge of the wonder, guess at the fear!
     Think what ancient gossips might say,
     Shaking their heads in their dreary way,
     Between the meetings on Sabbath-day!
     How urchins, searching at day's decline
     The Common Pasture for sheep or kine,
     The terrible double-ganger heard
     In leafy rustle or whir of bird!
     Think what a zest it gave to the sport,
     In berry-time, of the younger sort,
     As over pastures blackberry-twined,
     Reuben and Dorothy lagged behind,
     And closer and closer, for fear of harm,
     The maiden clung to her lover's arm;
     And how the spark, who was forced to stay,
     By his sweetheart's fears, till the break of day,
     Thanked the snake for the fond delay.

     Far and wide the tale was told,
     Like a snowball growing while it rolled.
     The nurse hushed with it the baby's cry;
     And it served, in the worthy minister's eye,
     To paint the primitive serpent by.
     Cotton Mather came galloping down
     All the way to Newbury town,
     With his eyes agog and his ears set wide,
     And his marvellous inkhorn at his side;
     Stirring the while in the shallow pool
     Of his brains for the lore he learned at school,
     To garnish the story, with here a streak
     Of Latin, and there another of Greek
     And the tales he heard and the notes he took,
     Behold! are they not in his Wonder-Book?

     Stories, like dragons, are hard to kill.
     If the snake does not, the tale runs still
     In Byfield Meadows, on Pipestave Hill.
     And still, whenever husband and wife
     Publish the shame of their daily strife,
     And, with mad cross-purpose, tug and strain
     At either end of the marriage-chain,
     The gossips say, with a knowing shake
     Of their gray heads, "Look at the Double Snake
     One in body and two in will,
     The Amphisbaena is living still!"

     1859.




MABEL MARTIN.

A HARVEST IDYL.

Susanna Martin, an aged woman of Amesbury, Mass., was tried and executed
for the alleged crime of witchcraft. Her home was in what is now known
as Pleasant Valley on the Merrimac, a little above the old Ferry way,
where, tradition says, an attempt was made to assassinate Sir Edmund
Andros on his way to Falmouth (afterward Portland) and Pemaquid, which
was frustrated by a warning timely given. Goody Martin was the only
woman hanged on the north side of the Merrimac during the dreadful
delusion. The aged wife of Judge Bradbury who lived on the other side of
the Powow River was imprisoned and would have been put to death but for
the collapse of the hideous persecution.

The substance of the poem which follows was published under the name of
The Witch's Daughter, in The National Era in 1857. In 1875 my publishers
desired to issue it with illustrations, and I then enlarged it and
otherwise altered it to its present form. The principal addition was in
the verses which constitute Part I.




PROEM.

     I CALL the old time back: I bring my lay
     in tender memory of the summer day
     When, where our native river lapsed away,

     We dreamed it over, while the thrushes made
     Songs of their own, and the great pine-trees laid
     On warm noonlights the masses of their shade.

     And she was with us, living o'er again
     Her life in ours, despite of years and pain,--
     The Autumn's brightness after latter rain.

     Beautiful in her holy peace as one
     Who stands, at evening, when the work is done,
     Glorified in the setting of the sun!

     Her memory makes our common landscape seem
     Fairer than any of which painters dream;
     Lights the brown hills and sings in every stream;

     For she whose speech was always truth's pure gold
     Heard, not unpleased, its simple legends told,
     And loved with us the beautiful and old.




I. THE RIVER VALLEY.

     Across the level tableland,
     A grassy, rarely trodden way,
     With thinnest skirt of birchen spray

     And stunted growth of cedar, leads
     To where you see the dull plain fall
     Sheer off, steep-slanted, ploughed by all

     The seasons' rainfalls. On its brink
     The over-leaning harebells swing,
     With roots half bare the pine-trees cling;

     And, through the shadow looking west,
     You see the wavering river flow
     Along a vale, that far below

     Holds to the sun, the sheltering hills
     And glimmering water-line between,
     Broad fields of corn and meadows green,

     And fruit-bent orchards grouped around
     The low brown roofs and painted eaves,
     And chimney-tops half hid in leaves.

     No warmer valley hides behind
     Yon wind-scourged sand-dunes, cold and bleak;
     No fairer river comes to seek

     The wave-sung welcome of the sea,
     Or mark the northmost border line
     Of sun-loved growths of nut and vine.

     Here, ground-fast in their native fields,
     Untempted by the city's gain,
     The quiet farmer folk remain

     Who bear the pleasant name of Friends,
     And keep their fathers' gentle ways
     And simple speech of Bible days;

     In whose neat homesteads woman holds
     With modest ease her equal place,
     And wears upon her tranquil face

     The look of one who, merging not
     Her self-hood in another's will,
     Is love's and duty's handmaid still.

     Pass with me down the path that winds
     Through birches to the open land,
     Where, close upon the river strand

     You mark a cellar, vine o'errun,
     Above whose wall of loosened stones
     The sumach lifts its reddening cones,

     And the black nightshade's berries shine,
     And broad, unsightly burdocks fold
     The household ruin, century-old.

     Here, in the dim colonial time
     Of sterner lives and gloomier faith,
     A woman lived, tradition saith,

     Who wrought her neighbors foul annoy,
     And witched and plagued the country-side,
     Till at the hangman's hand she died.

     Sit with me while the westering day
     Falls slantwise down the quiet vale,
     And, haply ere yon loitering sail,

     That rounds the upper headland, falls
     Below Deer Island's pines, or sees
     Behind it Hawkswood's belt of trees

     Rise black against the sinking sun,
     My idyl of its days of old,
     The valley's legend, shall be told.




II. THE HUSKING.

     It was the pleasant harvest-time,
     When cellar-bins are closely stowed,
     And garrets bend beneath their load,

     And the old swallow-haunted barns,--
     Brown-gabled, long, and full of seams
     Through which the rooted sunlight streams,

     And winds blow freshly in, to shake
     The red plumes of the roosted cocks,
     And the loose hay-mow's scented locks,

     Are filled with summer's ripened stores,
     Its odorous grass and barley sheaves,
     From their low scaffolds to their eaves.

     On Esek Harden's oaken floor,
     With many an autumn threshing worn,
     Lay the heaped ears of unhusked corn.

     And thither came young men and maids,
     Beneath a moon that, large and low,
     Lit that sweet eve of long ago.

     They took their places; some by chance,
     And others by a merry voice
     Or sweet smile guided to their choice.

     How pleasantly the rising moon,
     Between the shadow of the mows,
     Looked on them through the great elm-boughs!

     On sturdy boyhood, sun-embrowned,
     On girlhood with its solid curves
     Of healthful strength and painless nerves!

     And jests went round, and laughs that made
     The house-dog answer with his howl,
     And kept astir the barn-yard fowl;

     And quaint old songs their fathers sung
     In Derby dales and Yorkshire moors,
     Ere Norman William trod their shores;

     And tales, whose merry license shook
     The fat sides of the Saxon thane,
     Forgetful of the hovering Dane,--

     Rude plays to Celt and Cimbri known,
     The charms and riddles that beguiled
     On Oxus' banks the young world's child,--

     That primal picture-speech wherein
     Have youth and maid the story told,
     So new in each, so dateless old,

     Recalling pastoral Ruth in her
     Who waited, blushing and demure,
     The red-ear's kiss of forfeiture.

     But still the sweetest voice was mute
     That river-valley ever heard
     From lips of maid or throat of bird;

     For Mabel Martin sat apart,
     And let the hay-mow's shadow fall
     Upon the loveliest face of all.

     She sat apart, as one forbid,
     Who knew that none would condescend
     To own the Witch-wife's child a friend.

     The seasons scarce had gone their round,
     Since curious thousands thronged to see
     Her mother at the gallows-tree;

     And mocked the prison-palsied limbs
     That faltered on the fatal stairs,
     And wan lip trembling with its prayers!

     Few questioned of the sorrowing child,
     Or, when they saw the mother die;
     Dreamed of the daughter's agony.

     They went up to their homes that day,
     As men and Christians justified
     God willed it, and the wretch had died!

     Dear God and Father of us all,
     Forgive our faith in cruel lies,--
     Forgive the blindness that denies!

     Forgive thy creature when he takes,
     For the all-perfect love Thou art,
     Some grim creation of his heart.

     Cast down our idols, overturn
     Our bloody altars; let us see
     Thyself in Thy humanity!

     Young Mabel from her mother's grave
     Crept to her desolate hearth-stone,
     And wrestled with her fate alone;

     With love, and anger, and despair,
     The phantoms of disordered sense,
     The awful doubts of Providence!

     Oh, dreary broke the winter days,
     And dreary fell the winter nights
     When, one by one, the neighboring lights

     Went out, and human sounds grew still,
     And all the phantom-peopled dark
     Closed round her hearth-fire's dying spark.

     And summer days were sad and long,
     And sad the uncompanioned eyes,
     And sadder sunset-tinted leaves,

     And Indian Summer's airs of balm;
     She scarcely felt the soft caress,
     The beauty died of loneliness!

     The school-boys jeered her as they passed,
     And, when she sought the house of prayer,
     Her mother's curse pursued her there.

     And still o'er many a neighboring door
     She saw the horseshoe's curved charm,
     To guard against her mother's harm!

     That mother, poor and sick and lame,
     Who daily, by the old arm-chair,
     Folded her withered hands in prayer;--

     Who turned, in Salem's dreary jail,
     Her worn old Bible o'er and o'er,
     When her dim eyes could read no more!

     Sore tried and pained, the poor girl kept
     Her faith, and trusted that her way,
     So dark, would somewhere meet the day.

     And still her weary wheel went round
     Day after day, with no relief
     Small leisure have the poor for grief.




III. THE CHAMPION.

     So in the shadow Mabel sits;
     Untouched by mirth she sees and hears,
     Her smile is sadder than her tears.

     But cruel eyes have found her out,
     And cruel lips repeat her name,
     And taunt her with her mother's shame.

     She answered not with railing words,
     But drew her apron o'er her face,
     And, sobbing, glided from the place.

     And only pausing at the door,
     Her sad eyes met the troubled gaze
     Of one who, in her better days,

     Had been her warm and steady friend,
     Ere yet her mother's doom had made
     Even Esek Harden half afraid.

     He felt that mute appeal of tears,
     And, starting, with an angry frown,
     Hushed all the wicked murmurs down.

     "Good neighbors mine," he sternly said,
     "This passes harmless mirth or jest;
     I brook no insult to my guest.

     "She is indeed her mother's child;
     But God's sweet pity ministers
     Unto no whiter soul than hers.

     "Let Goody Martin rest in peace;
     I never knew her harm a fly,
     And witch or not, God knows--not I.

     "I know who swore her life away;
     And as God lives, I'd not condemn
     An Indian dog on word of them."

     The broadest lands in all the town,
     The skill to guide, the power to awe,
     Were Harden's; and his word was law.

     None dared withstand him to his face,
     But one sly maiden spake aside
     "The little witch is evil-eyed!

     "Her mother only killed a cow,
     Or witched a churn or dairy-pan;
     But she, forsooth, must charm a man!"




IV. IN THE SHADOW.

     Poor Mabel, homeward turning, passed
     The nameless terrors of the wood,
     And saw, as if a ghost pursued,

     Her shadow gliding in the moon;
     The soft breath of the west-wind gave
     A chill as from her mother's grave.

     How dreary seemed the silent house!
     Wide in the moonbeams' ghastly glare
     Its windows had a dead man's stare!

     And, like a gaunt and spectral hand,
     The tremulous shadow of a birch
     Reached out and touched the door's low porch,

     As if to lift its latch; hard by,
     A sudden warning call she beard,
     The night-cry of a boding bird.

     She leaned against the door; her face,
     So fair, so young, so full of pain,
     White in the moonlight's silver rain.

     The river, on its pebbled rim,
     Made music such as childhood knew;
     The door-yard tree was whispered through

     By voices such as childhood's ear
     Had heard in moonlights long ago;
     And through the willow-boughs below.

     She saw the rippled waters shine;
     Beyond, in waves of shade and light,
     The hills rolled off into the night.

     She saw and heard, but over all
     A sense of some transforming spell,
     The shadow of her sick heart fell.

     And still across the wooded space
     The harvest lights of Harden shone,
     And song and jest and laugh went on.

     And he, so gentle, true, and strong,
     Of men the bravest and the best,
     Had he, too, scorned her with the rest?

     She strove to drown her sense of wrong,
     And, in her old and simple way,
     To teach her bitter heart to pray.

     Poor child! the prayer, begun in faith,
     Grew to a low, despairing cry
     Of utter misery: "Let me die!

     "Oh! take me from the scornful eyes,
     And hide me where the cruel speech
     And mocking finger may not reach!

     "I dare not breathe my mother's name
     A daughter's right I dare not crave
     To weep above her unblest grave!

     "Let me not live until my heart,
     With few to pity, and with none
     To love me, hardens into stone.

     "O God! have mercy on Thy child,
     Whose faith in Thee grows weak and small,
     And take me ere I lose it all!"

     A shadow on the moonlight fell,
     And murmuring wind and wave became
     A voice whose burden was her name.




V. THE BETROTHAL.

     Had then God heard her? Had He sent
     His angel down? In flesh and blood,
     Before her Esek Harden stood!

     He laid his hand upon her arm
     "Dear Mabel, this no more shall be;
     Who scoffs at you must scoff at me.

     "You know rough Esek Harden well;
     And if he seems no suitor gay,
     And if his hair is touched with gray,

     "The maiden grown shall never find
     His heart less warm than when she smiled,
     Upon his knees, a little child!"

     Her tears of grief were tears of joy,
     As, folded in his strong embrace,
     She looked in Esek Harden's face.

     "O truest friend of all'" she said,
     "God bless you for your kindly thought,
     And make me worthy of my lot!"

     He led her forth, and, blent in one,
     Beside their happy pathway ran
     The shadows of the maid and man.

     He led her through his dewy fields,
     To where the swinging lanterns glowed,
     And through the doors the huskers showed.

     "Good friends and neighbors!" Esek said,
     "I'm weary of this lonely life;
     In Mabel see my chosen wife!

     "She greets you kindly, one and all;
     The past is past, and all offence
     Falls harmless from her innocence.

     "Henceforth she stands no more alone;
     You know what Esek Harden is;--
     He brooks no wrong to him or his.

     "Now let the merriest tales be told,
     And let the sweetest songs be sung
     That ever made the old heart young!

     "For now the lost has found a home;
     And a lone hearth shall brighter burn,
     As all the household joys return!"

     Oh, pleasantly the harvest-moon,
     Between the shadow of the mows,
     Looked on them through the great elm--boughs!

     On Mabel's curls of golden hair,
     On Esek's shaggy strength it fell;
     And the wind whispered, "It is well!"




THE PROPHECY OF SAMUEL SEWALL.

The prose version of this prophecy is to be found in Sewall's The New
Heaven upon the New Earth, 1697, quoted in Joshua Coffin's History of
Newbury. Judge Sewall's father, Henry Sewall, was one of the pioneers
of Newbury.

     UP and down the village streets
     Strange are the forms my fancy meets,
     For the thoughts and things of to-day are hid,
     And through the veil of a closed lid
     The ancient worthies I see again
     I hear the tap of the elder's cane,
     And his awful periwig I see,
     And the silver buckles of shoe and knee.
     Stately and slow, with thoughtful air,
     His black cap hiding his whitened hair,
     Walks the Judge of the great Assize,
     Samuel Sewall the good and wise.
     His face with lines of firmness wrought,
     He wears the look of a man unbought,
     Who swears to his hurt and changes not;
     Yet, touched and softened nevertheless
     With the grace of Christian gentleness,
     The face that a child would climb to kiss!
     True and tender and brave and just,
     That man might honor and woman trust.

     Touching and sad, a tale is told,
     Like a penitent hymn of the Psalmist old,
     Of the fast which the good man lifelong kept to
     With a haunting sorrow that never slept,
     As the circling year brought round the time
     Of an error that left the sting of crime,
     When he sat on the bench of the witchcraft courts,
     With the laws of Moses and Hale's Reports,
     And spake, in the name of both, the word
     That gave the witch's neck to the cord,
     And piled the oaken planks that pressed
     The feeble life from the warlock's breast!
     All the day long, from dawn to dawn,
     His door was bolted, his curtain drawn;
     No foot on his silent threshold trod,
     No eye looked on him save that of God,
     As he baffled the ghosts of the dead with charms
     Of penitent tears, and prayers, and psalms,
     And, with precious proofs from the sacred word
     Of the boundless pity and love of the Lord,
     His faith confirmed and his trust renewed
     That the sin of his ignorance, sorely rued,
     Might be washed away in the mingled flood
     Of his human sorrow and Christ's dear blood!

     Green forever the memory be
     Of the Judge of the old Theocracy,
     Whom even his errors glorified,
     Like a far-seen, sunlit mountain-side
     By the cloudy shadows which o'er it glide I
     Honor and praise to the Puritan
     Who the halting step of his age outran,
     And, seeing the infinite worth of man
     In the priceless gift the Father gave,
     In the infinite love that stooped to save,
     Dared not brand his brother a slave
     "Who doth such wrong," he was wont to say,
     In his own quaint, picture-loving way,
     "Flings up to Heaven a hand-grenade
     Which God shall cast down upon his head!"

     Widely as heaven and hell, contrast
     That brave old jurist of the past
     And the cunning trickster and knave of courts
     Who the holy features of Truth distorts,
     Ruling as right the will of the strong,
     Poverty, crime, and weakness wrong;
     Wide-eared to power, to the wronged and weak
     Deaf as Egypt's gods of leek;
     Scoffing aside at party's nod
     Order of nature and law of God;
     For whose dabbled ermine respect were waste,
     Reverence folly, and awe misplaced;
     Justice of whom 't were vain to seek
     As from Koordish robber or Syrian Sheik!
     Oh, leave the wretch to his bribes and sins;
     Let him rot in the web of lies he spins!
     To the saintly soul of the early day,
     To the Christian judge, let us turn and say
     "Praise and thanks for an honest man!--
     Glory to God for the Puritan!"

     I see, far southward, this quiet day,
     The hills of Newbury rolling away,
     With the many tints of the season gay,
     Dreamily blending in autumn mist
     Crimson, and gold, and amethyst.
     Long and low, with dwarf trees crowned,
     Plum Island lies, like a whale aground,
     A stone's toss over the narrow sound.
     Inland, as far as the eye can go,
     The hills curve round like a bended bow;
     A silver arrow from out them sprung,
     I see the shine of the Quasycung;
     And, round and round, over valley and hill,
     Old roads winding, as old roads will,
     Here to a ferry, and there to a mill;
     And glimpses of chimneys and gabled eaves,
     Through green elm arches and maple leaves,--
     Old homesteads sacred to all that can
     Gladden or sadden the heart of man,
     Over whose thresholds of oak and stone
     Life and Death have come and gone
     There pictured tiles in the fireplace show,
     Great beams sag from the ceiling low,
     The dresser glitters with polished wares,
     The long clock ticks on the foot-worn stairs,
     And the low, broad chimney shows the crack
     By the earthquake made a century back.
     Up from their midst springs the village spire
     With the crest of its cock in the sun afire;
     Beyond are orchards and planting lands,
     And great salt marshes and glimmering sands,
     And, where north and south the coast-lines run,
     The blink of the sea in breeze and sun!

     I see it all like a chart unrolled,
     But my thoughts are full of the past and old,
     I hear the tales of my boyhood told;
     And the shadows and shapes of early days
     Flit dimly by in the veiling haze,
     With measured movement and rhythmic chime
     Weaving like shuttles my web of rhyme.
     I think of the old man wise and good
     Who once on yon misty hillsides stood,
     (A poet who never measured rhyme,
     A seer unknown to his dull-eared time,)
     And, propped on his staff of age, looked down,
     With his boyhood's love, on his native town,
     Where, written, as if on its hills and plains,
     His burden of prophecy yet remains,
     For the voices of wood, and wave, and wind
     To read in the ear of the musing mind:--

     "As long as Plum Island, to guard the coast
     As God appointed, shall keep its post;
     As long as a salmon shall haunt the deep
     Of Merrimac River, or sturgeon leap;
     As long as pickerel swift and slim,
     Or red-backed perch, in Crane Pond swim;
     As long as the annual sea-fowl know
     Their time to come and their time to go;
     As long as cattle shall roam at will
     The green, grass meadows by Turkey Hill;
     As long as sheep shall look from the side
     Of Oldtown Hill on marishes wide,
     And Parker River, and salt-sea tide;
     As long as a wandering pigeon shall search
     The fields below from his white-oak perch,
     When the barley-harvest is ripe and shorn,
     And the dry husks fall from the standing corn;
     As long as Nature shall not grow old,
     Nor drop her work from her doting hold,
     And her care for the Indian corn forget,
     And the yellow rows in pairs to set;--
     So long shall Christians here be born,
     Grow up and ripen as God's sweet corn!--
     By the beak of bird, by the breath of frost,
     Shall never a holy ear be lost,
     But, husked by Death in the Planter's sight,
     Be sown again in the fields of light!"

     The Island still is purple with plums,
     Up the river the salmon comes,
     The sturgeon leaps, and the wild-fowl feeds
     On hillside berries and marish seeds,--
     All the beautiful signs remain,
     From spring-time sowing to autumn rain
     The good man's vision returns again!
     And let us hope, as well we can,
     That the Silent Angel who garners man
     May find some grain as of old lie found
     In the human cornfield ripe and sound,
     And the Lord of the Harvest deign to own
     The precious seed by the fathers sown!

     1859.




THE RED RIPER VOYAGEUR.

     OUT and in the river is winding
     The links of its long, red chain,
     Through belts of dusky pine-land
     And gusty leagues of plain.

     Only, at times, a smoke-wreath
     With the drifting cloud-rack joins,--
     The smoke of the hunting-lodges
     Of the wild Assiniboins.

     Drearily blows the north-wind
     From the land of ice and snow;
     The eyes that look are weary,
     And heavy the hands that row.

     And with one foot on the water,
     And one upon the shore,
     The Angel of Shadow gives warning
     That day shall be no more.

     Is it the clang of wild-geese?
     Is it the Indian's yell,
     That lends to the voice of the north-wind
     The tones of a far-off bell?

     The voyageur smiles as he listens
     To the sound that grows apace;
     Well he knows the vesper ringing
     Of the bells of St. Boniface.

     The bells of the Roman Mission,
     That call from their turrets twain,
     To the boatman on the river,
     To the hunter on the plain!

     Even so in our mortal journey
     The bitter north-winds blow,
     And thus upon life's Red River
     Our hearts, as oarsmen, row.

     And when the Angel of Shadow
     Rests his feet on wave and shore,
     And our eyes grow dim with watching
     And our hearts faint at the oar,

     Happy is he who heareth
     The signal of his release
     In the bells of the Holy City,
     The chimes of eternal peace!

     1859




THE PREACHER.

George Whitefield, the celebrated preacher, died at Newburyport in 1770,
and was buried under the church which has since borne his name.

     ITS windows flashing to the sky,
     Beneath a thousand roofs of brown,
     Far down the vale, my friend and I
     Beheld the old and quiet town;
     The ghostly sails that out at sea
     Flapped their white wings of mystery;
     The beaches glimmering in the sun,
     And the low wooded capes that run
     Into the sea-mist north and south;
     The sand-bluffs at the river's mouth;
     The swinging chain-bridge, and, afar,
     The foam-line of the harbor-bar.

     Over the woods and meadow-lands
     A crimson-tinted shadow lay,
     Of clouds through which the setting day
     Flung a slant glory far away.
     It glittered on the wet sea-sands,
     It flamed upon the city's panes,
     Smote the white sails of ships that wore
     Outward or in, and glided o'er
     The steeples with their veering vanes!

     Awhile my friend with rapid search
     O'erran the landscape. "Yonder spire
     Over gray roofs, a shaft of fire;
     What is it, pray?"--"The Whitefield Church!
     Walled about by its basement stones,
     There rest the marvellous prophet's bones."
     Then as our homeward way we walked,
     Of the great preacher's life we talked;
     And through the mystery of our theme
     The outward glory seemed to stream,
     And Nature's self interpreted
     The doubtful record of the dead;
     And every level beam that smote
     The sails upon the dark afloat
     A symbol of the light became,
     Which touched the shadows of our blame,
     With tongues of Pentecostal flame.

     Over the roofs of the pioneers
     Gathers the moss of a hundred years;
     On man and his works has passed the change
     Which needs must be in a century's range.
     The land lies open and warm in the sun,
     Anvils clamor and mill-wheels run,--
     Flocks on the hillsides, herds on the plain,
     The wilderness gladdened with fruit and grain!
     But the living faith of the settlers old
     A dead profession their children hold;
     To the lust of office and greed of trade
     A stepping-stone is the altar made.

     The church, to place and power the door,
     Rebukes the sin of the world no more,
     Nor sees its Lord in the homeless poor.
     Everywhere is the grasping hand,
     And eager adding of land to land;
     And earth, which seemed to the fathers meant
     But as a pilgrim's wayside tent,--
     A nightly shelter to fold away
     When the Lord should call at the break of day,--
     Solid and steadfast seems to be,
     And Time has forgotten Eternity!

     But fresh and green from the rotting roots
     Of primal forests the young growth shoots;
     From the death of the old the new proceeds,
     And the life of truth from the rot of creeds
     On the ladder of God, which upward leads,
     The steps of progress are human needs.
     For His judgments still are a mighty deep,
     And the eyes of His providence never sleep
     When the night is darkest He gives the morn;
     When the famine is sorest, the wine and corn!

     In the church of the wilderness Edwards wrought,
     Shaping his creed at the forge of thought;
     And with Thor's own hammer welded and bent
     The iron links of his argument,
     Which strove to grasp in its mighty span
     The purpose of God and the fate of man
     Yet faithful still, in his daily round
     To the weak, and the poor, and sin-sick found,
     The schoolman's lore and the casuist's art
     Drew warmth and life from his fervent heart.

     Had he not seen in the solitudes
     Of his deep and dark Northampton woods
     A vision of love about him fall?
     Not the blinding splendor which fell on Saul,
     But the tenderer glory that rests on them
     Who walk in the New Jerusalem,
     Where never the sun nor moon are known,
     But the Lord and His love are the light alone
     And watching the sweet, still countenance
     Of the wife of his bosom rapt in trance,
     Had he not treasured each broken word
     Of the mystical wonder seen and heard;
     And loved the beautiful dreamer more
     That thus to the desert of earth she bore
     Clusters of Eshcol from Canaan's shore?

     As the barley-winnower, holding with pain
     Aloft in waiting his chaff and grain,
     Joyfully welcomes the far-off breeze
     Sounding the pine-tree's slender keys,
     So he who had waited long to hear
     The sound of the Spirit drawing near,
     Like that which the son of Iddo heard
     When the feet of angels the myrtles stirred,
     Felt the answer of prayer, at last,
     As over his church the afflatus passed,
     Breaking its sleep as breezes break
     To sun-bright ripples a stagnant lake.

     At first a tremor of silent fear,
     The creep of the flesh at danger near,
     A vague foreboding and discontent,
     Over the hearts of the people went.
     All nature warned in sounds and signs
     The wind in the tops of the forest pines
     In the name of the Highest called to prayer,
     As the muezzin calls from the minaret stair.
     Through ceiled chambers of secret sin
     Sudden and strong the light shone in;
     A guilty sense of his neighbor's needs
     Startled the man of title-deeds;
     The trembling hand of the worldling shook
     The dust of years from the Holy Book;
     And the psalms of David, forgotten long,
     Took the place of the scoffer's song.

     The impulse spread like the outward course
     Of waters moved by a central force;
     The tide of spiritual life rolled down
     From inland mountains to seaboard town.

     Prepared and ready the altar stands
     Waiting the prophet's outstretched hands
     And prayer availing, to downward call
     The fiery answer in view of all.
     Hearts are like wax in the furnace; who
     Shall mould, and shape, and cast them anew?
     Lo! by the Merrimac Whitefield stands
     In the temple that never was made by hands,--
     Curtains of azure, and crystal wall,
     And dome of the sunshine over all--
     A homeless pilgrim, with dubious name
     Blown about on the winds of fame;
     Now as an angel of blessing classed,
     And now as a mad enthusiast.
     Called in his youth to sound and gauge
     The moral lapse of his race and age,
     And, sharp as truth, the contrast draw
     Of human frailty and perfect law;
     Possessed by the one dread thought that lent
     Its goad to his fiery temperament,
     Up and down the world he went,
     A John the Baptist crying, Repent!

     No perfect whole can our nature make;
     Here or there the circle will break;
     The orb of life as it takes the light
     On one side leaves the other in night.
     Never was saint so good and great
     As to give no chance at St. Peter's gate
     For the plea of the Devil's advocate.
     So, incomplete by his being's law,
     The marvellous preacher had his flaw;
     With step unequal, and lame with faults,
     His shade on the path of History halts.

     Wisely and well said the Eastern bard
     Fear is easy, but love is hard,--
     Easy to glow with the Santon's rage,
     And walk on the Meccan pilgrimage;
     But he is greatest and best who can
     Worship Allah by loving man.
     Thus he,--to whom, in the painful stress
     Of zeal on fire from its own excess,
     Heaven seemed so vast and earth so small
     That man was nothing, since God was all,--
     Forgot, as the best at times have done,
     That the love of the Lord and of man are one.
     Little to him whose feet unshod
     The thorny path of the desert trod,
     Careless of pain, so it led to God,
     Seemed the hunger-pang and the poor man's wrong,
     The weak ones trodden beneath the strong.
     Should the worm be chooser?--the clay withstand
     The shaping will of the potter's hand?

     In the Indian fable Arjoon hears
     The scorn of a god rebuke his fears
     "Spare thy pity!" Krishna saith;
     "Not in thy sword is the power of death!
     All is illusion,--loss but seems;
     Pleasure and pain are only dreams;
     Who deems he slayeth doth not kill;
     Who counts as slain is living still.
     Strike, nor fear thy blow is crime;
     Nothing dies but the cheats of time;
     Slain or slayer, small the odds
     To each, immortal as Indra's gods!"

     So by Savannah's banks of shade,
     The stones of his mission the preacher laid
     On the heart of the negro crushed and rent,
     And made of his blood the wall's cement;
     Bade the slave-ship speed from coast to coast,
     Fanned by the wings of the Holy Ghost;
     And begged, for the love of Christ, the gold
     Coined from the hearts in its groaning hold.
     What could it matter, more or less
     Of stripes, and hunger, and weariness?
     Living or dying, bond or free,
     What was time to eternity?

     Alas for the preacher's cherished schemes!
     Mission and church are now but dreams;
     Nor prayer nor fasting availed the plan
     To honor God through the wrong of man.
     Of all his labors no trace remains
     Save the bondman lifting his hands in chains.
     The woof he wove in the righteous warp
     Of freedom-loving Oglethorpe,
     Clothes with curses the goodly land,
     Changes its greenness and bloom to sand;
     And a century's lapse reveals once more
     The slave-ship stealing to Georgia's shore.
     Father of Light! how blind is he
     Who sprinkles the altar he rears to Thee
     With the blood and tears of humanity!

     He erred: shall we count His gifts as naught?
     Was the work of God in him unwrought?
     The servant may through his deafness err,
     And blind may be God's messenger;
     But the Errand is sure they go upon,--
     The word is spoken, the deed is done.
     Was the Hebrew temple less fair and good
     That Solomon bowed to gods of wood?
     For his tempted heart and wandering feet,
     Were the songs of David less pure and sweet?
     So in light and shadow the preacher went,
     God's erring and human instrument;
     And the hearts of the people where he passed
     Swayed as the reeds sway in the blast,
     Under the spell of a voice which took
     In its compass the flow of Siloa's brook,
     And the mystical chime of the bells of gold
     On the ephod's hem of the priest of old,--
     Now the roll of thunder, and now the awe
     Of the trumpet heard in the Mount of Law.

     A solemn fear on the listening crowd
     Fell like the shadow of a cloud.
     The sailor reeling from out the ships
     Whose masts stood thick in the river-slips
     Felt the jest and the curse die on his lips.
     Listened the fisherman rude and hard,
     The calker rough from the builder's yard;
     The man of the market left his load,
     The teamster leaned on his bending goad,
     The maiden, and youth beside her, felt
     Their hearts in a closer union melt,
     And saw the flowers of their love in bloom
     Down the endless vistas of life to come.
     Old age sat feebly brushing away
     From his ears the scanty locks of gray;
     And careless boyhood, living the free
     Unconscious life of bird and tree,
     Suddenly wakened to a sense
     Of sin and its guilty consequence.
     It was as if an angel's voice
     Called the listeners up for their final choice;
     As if a strong hand rent apart
     The veils of sense from soul and heart,
     Showing in light ineffable
     The joys of heaven and woes of hell
     All about in the misty air
     The hill