The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hung Lou Meng, Book I, by Cao Xueqin

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Hung Lou Meng, Book I

Author: Cao Xueqin

Release Date: January, 2006  [EBook #9603]
[This file was first posted on October 9, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, HUNG LOU MENG, BOOK I ***




E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland and Project Gutenberg Distributed
Proofreaders







Editors note: This novel is divided into two books, of which this is
              Book I.  Book II (7hlm210.txt, 7hlm210.zip, 8hlm210.txt,
              or 8hllm210.zip) will be found in our etext05 directory
              (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext05/).




HUNG LOU MENG;

OR, THE DREAM OF THE RED CHAMBER, A CHINESE NOVEL

BY

CAO XUEQIN

Translated by H. BENCRAFT JOLY







BOOK I.





PREFACE.

This translation was suggested not by any pretensions to range myself
among the ranks of the body of sinologues, but by the perplexities and
difficulties experienced by me as a student in Peking, when, at the
completion of the Tzu Erh Chi, I had to plunge in the maze of the Hung
Lou Meng.

Shortcomings are, I feel sure, to be discovered, both in the prose, as
well as among the doggerel and uncouth rhymes, in which the text has
been more adhered to than rhythm; but I shall feel satisfied with the
result, if I succeed, even in the least degree, in affording a helping
hand to present and future students of the Chinese language.

H. BENCRAFT JOLY, H.B.M. Vice-Consulate, Macao, 1st September, 1891.






THE DREAM OF THE RED CHAMBER.




CHAPTER I.

  Chen Shih-yin, in a vision, apprehends perception and spirituality.
  Chia Yue-ts'un, in the (windy and dusty) world, cherishes fond thoughts
      of a beautiful maiden.


This is the opening section; this the first chapter. Subsequent to the
visions of a dream which he had, on some previous occasion, experienced,
the writer personally relates, he designedly concealed the true
circumstances, and borrowed the attributes of perception and
spirituality to relate this story of the Record of the Stone. With this
purpose, he made use of such designations as Chen Shih-yin (truth under
the garb of fiction) and the like. What are, however, the events
recorded in this work? Who are the dramatis personae?

Wearied with the drudgery experienced of late in the world, the author
speaking for himself, goes on to explain, with the lack of success which
attended every single concern, I suddenly bethought myself of the
womankind of past ages. Passing one by one under a minute scrutiny, I
felt that in action and in lore, one and all were far above me; that in
spite of the majesty of my manliness, I could not, in point of fact,
compare with these characters of the gentle sex. And my shame forsooth
then knew no bounds; while regret, on the other hand, was of no avail,
as there was not even a remote possibility of a day of remedy.

On this very day it was that I became desirous to compile, in a
connected form, for publication throughout the world, with a view to
(universal) information, how that I bear inexorable and manifold
retribution; inasmuch as what time, by the sustenance of the benevolence
of Heaven, and the virtue of my ancestors, my apparel was rich and fine,
and as what days my fare was savory and sumptuous, I disregarded the
bounty of education and nurture of father and mother, and paid no heed
to the virtue of precept and injunction of teachers and friends, with
the result that I incurred the punishment, of failure recently in the
least trifle, and the reckless waste of half my lifetime. There have
been meanwhile, generation after generation, those in the inner
chambers, the whole mass of whom could not, on any account, be, through
my influence, allowed to fall into extinction, in order that I, unfilial
as I have been, may have the means to screen my own shortcomings.

Hence it is that the thatched shed, with bamboo mat windows, the bed of
tow and the stove of brick, which are at present my share, are not
sufficient to deter me from carrying out the fixed purpose of my mind.
And could I, furthermore, confront the morning breeze, the evening moon,
the willows by the steps and the flowers in the courtyard, methinks
these would moisten to a greater degree my mortal pen with ink; but
though I lack culture and erudition, what harm is there, however, in
employing fiction and unrecondite language to give utterance to the
merits of these characters? And were I also able to induce the inmates
of the inner chamber to understand and diffuse them, could I besides
break the weariness of even so much as a single moment, or could I open
the eyes of my contemporaries, will it not forsooth prove a boon?

This consideration has led to the usage of such names as Chia Yue-ts'un
and other similar appellations.

More than any in these pages have been employed such words as dreams and
visions; but these dreams constitute the main argument of this work, and
combine, furthermore, the design of giving a word of warning to my
readers.

Reader, can you suggest whence the story begins?

The narration may border on the limits of incoherency and triviality,
but it possesses considerable zest. But to begin.

The Empress Nue Wo, (the goddess of works,) in fashioning blocks of
stones, for the repair of the heavens, prepared, at the Ta Huang Hills
and Wu Ch'i cave, 36,501 blocks of rough stone, each twelve chang in
height, and twenty-four chang square. Of these stones, the Empress Wo
only used 36,500; so that one single block remained over and above,
without being turned to any account. This was cast down the Ch'ing Keng
peak. This stone, strange to say, after having undergone a process of
refinement, attained a nature of efficiency, and could, by its innate
powers, set itself into motion and was able to expand and to contract.

When it became aware that the whole number of blocks had been made use
of to repair the heavens, that it alone had been destitute of the
necessary properties and had been unfit to attain selection, it
forthwith felt within itself vexation and shame, and day and night, it
gave way to anguish and sorrow.

One day, while it lamented its lot, it suddenly caught sight, at a great
distance, of a Buddhist bonze and of a Taoist priest coming towards that
direction. Their appearance was uncommon, their easy manner remarkable.
When they drew near this Ch'ing Keng peak, they sat on the ground to
rest, and began to converse. But on noticing the block newly-polished
and brilliantly clear, which had moreover contracted in dimensions, and
become no larger than the pendant of a fan, they were greatly filled
with admiration. The Buddhist priest picked it up, and laid it in the
palm of his hand.

"Your appearance," he said laughingly, "may well declare you to be a
supernatural object, but as you lack any inherent quality it is
necessary to inscribe a few characters on you, so that every one who
shall see you may at once recognise you to be a remarkable thing. And
subsequently, when you will be taken into a country where honour and
affluence will reign, into a family cultured in mind and of official
status, in a land where flowers and trees shall flourish with
luxuriance, in a town of refinement, renown and glory; when you once
will have been there..."

The stone listened with intense delight.

"What characters may I ask," it consequently inquired, "will you
inscribe? and what place will I be taken to? pray, pray explain to me in
lucid terms." "You mustn't be inquisitive," the bonze replied, with a
smile, "in days to come you'll certainly understand everything." Having
concluded these words, he forthwith put the stone in his sleeve, and
proceeded leisurely on his journey, in company with the Taoist priest.
Whither, however, he took the stone, is not divulged. Nor can it be
known how many centuries and ages elapsed, before a Taoist priest, K'ung
K'ung by name, passed, during his researches after the eternal reason
and his quest after immortality, by these Ta Huang Hills, Wu Ch'i cave
and Ch'ing Keng Peak. Suddenly perceiving a large block of stone, on the
surface of which the traces of characters giving, in a connected form,
the various incidents of its fate, could be clearly deciphered, K'ung
K'ung examined them from first to last. They, in fact, explained how
that this block of worthless stone had originally been devoid of the
properties essential for the repairs to the heavens, how it would be
transmuted into human form and introduced by Mang Mang the High Lord,
and Miao Miao, the Divine, into the world of mortals, and how it would
be led over the other bank (across the San Sara). On the surface, the
record of the spot where it would fall, the place of its birth, as well
as various family trifles and trivial love affairs of young ladies,
verses, odes, speeches and enigmas was still complete; but the name of
the dynasty and the year of the reign were obliterated, and could not be
ascertained.

On the obverse, were also the following enigmatical verses:

  Lacking in virtues meet the azure skies to mend,
  In vain the mortal world full many a year I wend,
  Of a former and after life these facts that be,
  Who will for a tradition strange record for me?

K'ung K'ung, the Taoist, having pondered over these lines for a while,
became aware that this stone had a history of some kind.

"Brother stone," he forthwith said, addressing the stone, "the concerns
of past days recorded on you possess, according to your own account, a
considerable amount of interest, and have been for this reason
inscribed, with the intent of soliciting generations to hand them down
as remarkable occurrences. But in my own opinion, they lack, in the
first place, any data by means of which to establish the name of the
Emperor and the year of his reign; and, in the second place, these
constitute no record of any excellent policy, adopted by any high
worthies or high loyal statesmen, in the government of the state, or in
the rule of public morals. The contents simply treat of a certain number
of maidens, of exceptional character; either of their love affairs or
infatuations, or of their small deserts or insignificant talents; and
were I to transcribe the whole collection of them, they would,
nevertheless, not be estimated as a book of any exceptional worth."

"Sir Priest," the stone replied with assurance, "why are you so
excessively dull? The dynasties recorded in the rustic histories, which
have been written from age to age, have, I am fain to think, invariably
assumed, under false pretences, the mere nomenclature of the Han and
T'ang dynasties. They differ from the events inscribed on my block,
which do not borrow this customary practice, but, being based on my own
experiences and natural feelings, present, on the contrary, a novel and
unique character. Besides, in the pages of these rustic histories,
either the aspersions upon sovereigns and statesmen, or the strictures
upon individuals, their wives, and their daughters, or the deeds of
licentiousness and violence are too numerous to be computed. Indeed,
there is one more kind of loose literature, the wantonness and pollution
in which work most easy havoc upon youth.

"As regards the works, in which the characters of scholars and beauties
is delineated their allusions are again repeatedly of Wen Chuen, their
theme in every page of Tzu Chien; a thousand volumes present no
diversity; and a thousand characters are but a counterpart of each
other. What is more, these works, throughout all their pages, cannot
help bordering on extreme licence. The authors, however, had no other
object in view than to give utterance to a few sentimental odes and
elegant ballads of their own, and for this reason they have fictitiously
invented the names and surnames of both men and women, and necessarily
introduced, in addition, some low characters, who should, like a buffoon
in a play, create some excitement in the plot.

"Still more loathsome is a kind of pedantic and profligate literature,
perfectly devoid of all natural sentiment, full of self-contradictions;
and, in fact, the contrast to those maidens in my work, whom I have,
during half my lifetime, seen with my own eyes and heard with my own
ears. And though I will not presume to estimate them as superior to the
heroes and heroines in the works of former ages, yet the perusal of the
motives and issues of their experiences, may likewise afford matter
sufficient to banish dulness, and to break the spell of melancholy.

"As regards the several stanzas of doggerel verse, they may too evoke
such laughter as to compel the reader to blurt out the rice, and to
spurt out the wine.

"In these pages, the scenes depicting the anguish of separation, the
bliss of reunion, and the fortunes of prosperity and of adversity are
all, in every detail, true to human nature, and I have not taken upon
myself to make the slightest addition, or alteration, which might lead
to the perversion of the truth.

"My only object has been that men may, after a drinking bout, or after
they wake from sleep or when in need of relaxation from the pressure of
business, take up this light literature, and not only expunge the traces
of antiquated books, and obtain a new kind of distraction, but that they
may also lay by a long life as well as energy and strength; for it bears
no point of similarity to those works, whose designs are false, whose
course is immoral. Now, Sir Priest, what are your views on the subject?"

K'ung K'ung having pondered for a while over the words, to which he had
listened intently, re-perused, throughout, this record of the stone; and
finding that the general purport consisted of nought else than a
treatise on love, and likewise of an accurate transcription of facts,
without the least taint of profligacy injurious to the times, he
thereupon copied the contents, from beginning to end, to the intent of
charging the world to hand them down as a strange story.

Hence it was that K'ung K'ung, the Taoist, in consequence of his
perception, (in his state of) abstraction, of passion, the generation,
from this passion, of voluptuousness, the transmission of this
voluptuousness into passion, and the apprehension, by means of passion,
of its unreality, forthwith altered his name for that of "Ch'ing Tseng"
(the Voluptuous Bonze), and changed the title of "the Memoir of a Stone"
(Shih-t'ou-chi,) for that of "Ch'ing Tseng Lu," The Record of the
Voluptuous Bonze; while K'ung Mei-chi of Tung Lu gave it the name of
"Feng Yueeh Pao Chien," "The Precious Mirror of Voluptuousness." In later
years, owing to the devotion by Tsao Hsueeh-ch'in in the Tao Hung study,
of ten years to the perusal and revision of the work, the additions and
modifications effected by him five times, the affix of an index and the
division into periods and chapters, the book was again entitled "Chin
Ling Shih Erh Ch'ai," "The Twelve Maidens of Chin Ling." A stanza was
furthermore composed for the purpose. This then, and no other, is the
origin of the Record of the Stone. The poet says appositely:--

  Pages full of silly litter,
  Tears a handful sour and bitter;
  All a fool the author hold,
  But their zest who can unfold?

You have now understood the causes which brought about the Record of the
Stone, but as you are not, as yet, aware what characters are depicted,
and what circumstances are related on the surface of the block, reader,
please lend an ear to the narrative on the stone, which runs as
follows:--

In old days, the land in the South East lay low. In this South-East part
of the world, was situated a walled town, Ku Su by name. Within the
walls a locality, called the Ch'ang Men, was more than all others
throughout the mortal world, the centre, which held the second, if not
the first place for fashion and life. Beyond this Ch'ang Men was a
street called Shih-li-chieh (Ten _Li_ street); in this street a lane,
the Jen Ch'ing lane (Humanity and Purity); and in this lane stood an old
temple, which on account of its diminutive dimensions, was called, by
general consent, the Gourd temple. Next door to this temple lived the
family of a district official, Chen by surname, Fei by name, and
Shih-yin by style. His wife, nee Feng, possessed a worthy and virtuous
disposition, and had a clear perception of moral propriety and good
conduct. This family, though not in actual possession of excessive
affluence and honours, was, nevertheless, in their district, conceded to
be a clan of well-to-do standing. As this Chen Shih-yin was of a
contented and unambitious frame of mind, and entertained no hankering
after any official distinction, but day after day of his life took
delight in gazing at flowers, planting bamboos, sipping his wine and
conning poetical works, he was in fact, in the indulgence of these
pursuits, as happy as a supernatural being.

One thing alone marred his happiness. He had lived over half a century
and had, as yet, no male offspring around his knees. He had one only
child, a daughter, whose infant name was Ying Lien. She was just three
years of age. On a long summer day, on which the heat had been intense,
Shih-yin sat leisurely in his library. Feeling his hand tired, he
dropped the book he held, leant his head on a teapoy, and fell asleep.

Of a sudden, while in this state of unconsciousness, it seemed as if he
had betaken himself on foot to some spot or other whither he could not
discriminate. Unexpectedly he espied, in the opposite direction, two
priests coming towards him: the one a Buddhist, the other a Taoist. As
they advanced they kept up the conversation in which they were engaged.
"Whither do you purpose taking the object you have brought away?" he
heard the Taoist inquire. To this question the Buddhist replied with a
smile: "Set your mind at ease," he said; "there's now in maturity a plot
of a general character involving mundane pleasures, which will presently
come to a denouement. The whole number of the votaries of voluptuousness
have, as yet, not been quickened or entered the world, and I mean to
avail myself of this occasion to introduce this object among their
number, so as to give it a chance to go through the span of human
existence." "The votaries of voluptuousness of these days will naturally
have again to endure the ills of life during their course through the
mortal world," the Taoist remarked; "but when, I wonder, will they
spring into existence? and in what place will they descend?"

"The account of these circumstances," the bonze ventured to reply, "is
enough to make you laugh! They amount to this: there existed in the
west, on the bank of the Ling (spiritual) river, by the side of the San
Sheng (thrice-born) stone, a blade of the Chiang Chu (purple pearl)
grass. At about the same time it was that the block of stone was,
consequent upon its rejection by the goddess of works, also left to
ramble and wander to its own gratification, and to roam about at
pleasure to every and any place. One day it came within the precincts of
the Ching Huan (Monitory Vision) Fairy; and this Fairy, cognizant of the
fact that this stone had a history, detained it, therefore, to reside at
the Ch'ih Hsia (purple clouds) palace, and apportioned to it the duties
of attendant on Shen Ying, a fairy of the Ch'ih Hsia palace.

"This stone would, however, often stroll along the banks of the Ling
river, and having at the sight of the blade of spiritual grass been
filled with admiration, it, day by day, moistened its roots with sweet
dew. This purple pearl grass, at the outset, tarried for months and
years; but being at a later period imbued with the essence and
luxuriance of heaven and earth, and having incessantly received the
moisture and nurture of the sweet dew, divested itself, in course of
time, of the form of a grass; assuming, in lieu, a human nature, which
gradually became perfected into the person of a girl.

"Every day she was wont to wander beyond the confines of the Li Hen
(divested animosities) heavens. When hungry she fed on the Pi Ch'ing
(hidden love) fruit--when thirsty she drank the Kuan ch'ou (discharged
sorrows,) water. Having, however, up to this time, not shewn her
gratitude for the virtue of nurture lavished upon her, the result was
but natural that she should resolve in her heart upon a constant and
incessant purpose to make suitable acknowledgment.

"I have been," she would often commune within herself, "the recipient of
the gracious bounty of rain and dew, but I possess no such water as was
lavished upon me to repay it! But should it ever descend into the world
in the form of a human being, I will also betake myself thither, along
with it; and if I can only have the means of making restitution to it,
with the tears of a whole lifetime, I may be able to make adequate
return."

"This resolution it is that will evolve the descent into the world of so
many pleasure-bound spirits of retribution and the experience of
fantastic destinies; and this crimson pearl blade will also be among the
number. The stone still lies in its original place, and why should not
you and I take it along before the tribunal of the Monitory Vision
Fairy, and place on its behalf its name on record, so that it should
descend into the world, in company with these spirits of passion, and
bring this plot to an issue?"

"It is indeed ridiculous," interposed the Taoist. "Never before have I
heard even the very mention of restitution by means of tears! Why should
not you and I avail ourselves of this opportunity to likewise go down
into the world? and if successful in effecting the salvation of a few of
them, will it not be a work meritorious and virtuous?"

"This proposal," remarked the Buddhist, "is quite in harmony with my own
views. Come along then with me to the palace of the Monitory Vision
Fairy, and let us deliver up this good-for-nothing object, and have done
with it! And when the company of pleasure-bound spirits of wrath descend
into human existence, you and I can then enter the world. Half of them
have already fallen into the dusty universe, but the whole number of
them have not, as yet, come together."

"Such being the case," the Taoist acquiesced, "I am ready to follow you,
whenever you please to go."

But to return to Chen Shih-yin. Having heard every one of these words
distinctly, he could not refrain from forthwith stepping forward and
paying homage. "My spiritual lords," he said, as he smiled, "accept my
obeisance." The Buddhist and Taoist priests lost no time in responding
to the compliment, and they exchanged the usual salutations. "My
spiritual lords," Shih-yin continued; "I have just heard the
conversation that passed between you, on causes and effects, a
conversation the like of which few mortals have forsooth listened to;
but your younger brother is sluggish of intellect, and cannot lucidly
fathom the import! Yet could this dulness and simplicity be graciously
dispelled, your younger brother may, by listening minutely, with
undefiled ear and careful attention, to a certain degree be aroused to a
sense of understanding; and what is more, possibly find the means of
escaping the anguish of sinking down into Hades."

The two spirits smiled, "The conversation," they added, "refers to the
primordial scheme and cannot be divulged before the proper season; but,
when the time comes, mind do not forget us two, and you will readily be
able to escape from the fiery furnace."

Shih-yin, after this reply, felt it difficult to make any further
inquiries. "The primordial scheme," he however remarked smiling,
"cannot, of course, be divulged; but what manner of thing, I wonder, is
the good-for-nothing object you alluded to a short while back? May I not
be allowed to judge for myself?"

"This object about which you ask," the Buddhist Bonze responded, "is
intended, I may tell you, by fate to be just glanced at by you." With
these words he produced it, and handed it over to Shih-yin.

Shih-yin received it. On scrutiny he found it, in fact, to be a
beautiful gem, so lustrous and so clear that the traces of characters on
the surface were distinctly visible. The characters inscribed consisted
of the four "T'ung Ling Pao Yue," "Precious Gem of Spiritual Perception."
On the obverse, were also several columns of minute words, which he was
just in the act of looking at intently, when the Buddhist at once
expostulated.

"We have already reached," he exclaimed, "the confines of vision."
Snatching it violently out of his hands, he walked away with the Taoist,
under a lofty stone portal, on the face of which appeared in large type
the four characters: "T'ai Hsue Huan Ching," "The Visionary limits of the
Great Void." On each side was a scroll with the lines:

  When falsehood stands for truth, truth likewise becomes false,
  Where naught be made to aught, aught changes into naught.

Shih-yin meant also to follow them on the other side, but, as he was
about to make one step forward, he suddenly heard a crash, just as if
the mountains had fallen into ruins, and the earth sunk into
destruction. As Shih-yin uttered a loud shout, he looked with strained
eye; but all he could see was the fiery sun shining, with glowing rays,
while the banana leaves drooped their heads. By that time, half of the
circumstances connected with the dream he had had, had already slipped
from his memory.

He also noticed a nurse coming towards him with Ying Lien in her arms.
To Shih-yin's eyes his daughter appeared even more beautiful, such a
bright gem, so precious, and so lovable. Forthwith stretching out his
arms, he took her over, and, as he held her in his embrace, he coaxed
her to play with him for a while; after which he brought her up to the
street to see the great stir occasioned by the procession that was going
past.

He was about to come in, when he caught sight of two priests, one a
Taoist, the other a Buddhist, coming hither from the opposite direction.
The Buddhist had a head covered with mange, and went barefooted. The
Taoist had a limping foot, and his hair was all dishevelled.

Like maniacs, they jostled along, chattering and laughing as they drew
near.

As soon as they reached Shih-yin's door, and they perceived him with
Ying Lien in his arms, the Bonze began to weep aloud.

Turning towards Shih-yin, he said to him: "My good Sir, why need you
carry in your embrace this living but luckless thing, which will involve
father and mother in trouble?"

These words did not escape Shih-yin's ear; but persuaded that they
amounted to raving talk, he paid no heed whatever to the bonze.

"Part with her and give her to me," the Buddhist still went on to say.

Shih-yin could not restrain his annoyance; and hastily pressing his
daughter closer to him, he was intent upon going in, when the bonze
pointed his hand at him, and burst out in a loud fit of laughter.

He then gave utterance to the four lines that follow:

  You indulge your tender daughter and are laughed at as inane;
  Vain you face the snow, oh mirror! for it will evanescent wane,
  When the festival of lanterns is gone by, guard 'gainst your doom,
  'Tis what time the flames will kindle, and the fire will consume.

Shih-yin understood distinctly the full import of what he heard; but his
heart was still full of conjectures. He was about to inquire who and
what they were, when he heard the Taoist remark,--"You and I cannot
speed together; let us now part company, and each of us will be then
able to go after his own business. After the lapse of three ages, I
shall be at the Pei Mang mount, waiting for you; and we can, after our
reunion, betake ourselves to the Visionary Confines of the Great Void,
there to cancel the name of the stone from the records."

"Excellent! first rate!" exclaimed the Bonze. And at the conclusion of
these words, the two men parted, each going his own way, and no trace
was again seen of them.

"These two men," Shih-yin then pondered within his heart, "must have had
many experiences, and I ought really to have made more inquiries of
them; but at this juncture to indulge in regret is anyhow too late."

While Shih-yin gave way to these foolish reflections, he suddenly
noticed the arrival of a penniless scholar, Chia by surname, Hua by
name, Shih-fei by style and Yue-ts'un by nickname, who had taken up his
quarters in the Gourd temple next door. This Chia Yue-ts'un was
originally a denizen of Hu-Chow, and was also of literary and official
parentage, but as he was born of the youngest stock, and the possessions
of his paternal and maternal ancestors were completely exhausted, and
his parents and relatives were dead, he remained the sole and only
survivor; and, as he found his residence in his native place of no
avail, he therefore entered the capital in search of that reputation,
which would enable him to put the family estate on a proper standing. He
had arrived at this place since the year before last, and had, what is
more, lived all along in very straitened circumstances. He had made the
temple his temporary quarters, and earned a living by daily occupying
himself in composing documents and writing letters for customers. Thus
it was that Shih-yin had been in constant relations with him.

As soon as Yue-ts'un perceived Shih-yin, he lost no time in saluting him.
"My worthy Sir," he observed with a forced smile; "how is it you are
leaning against the door and looking out? Is there perchance any news
astir in the streets, or in the public places?"

"None whatever," replied Shih-yin, as he returned the smile. "Just a
while back, my young daughter was in sobs, and I coaxed her out here to
amuse her. I am just now without anything whatever to attend to, so
that, dear brother Chia, you come just in the nick of time. Please walk
into my mean abode, and let us endeavour, in each other's company, to
while away this long summer day."

After he had made this remark, he bade a servant take his daughter in,
while he, hand-in-hand with Yue-ts'un, walked into the library, where a
young page served tea. They had hardly exchanged a few sentences, when
one of the household came in, in flying haste, to announce that Mr. Yen
had come to pay a visit.

Shih-yin at once stood up. "Pray excuse my rudeness," he remarked
apologetically, "but do sit down; I shall shortly rejoin you, and enjoy
the pleasure of your society." "My dear Sir," answered Yue-ts'un, as he
got up, also in a conceding way, "suit your own convenience. I've often
had the honour of being your guest, and what will it matter if I wait a
little?" While these apologies were yet being spoken, Shih-yin had
already walked out into the front parlour. During his absence, Yue-ts'un
occupied himself in turning over the pages of some poetical work to
dispel ennui, when suddenly he heard, outside the window, a woman's
cough. Yue-ts'un hurriedly got up and looked out. He saw at a glance that
it was a servant girl engaged in picking flowers. Her deportment was out
of the common; her eyes so bright, her eyebrows so well defined. Though
not a perfect beauty, she possessed nevertheless charms sufficient to
arouse the feelings. Yue-ts'un unwittingly gazed at her with fixed eye.
This waiting-maid, belonging to the Chen family, had done picking
flowers, and was on the point of going in, when she of a sudden raised
her eyes and became aware of the presence of some person inside the
window, whose head-gear consisted of a turban in tatters, while his
clothes were the worse for wear. But in spite of his poverty, he was
naturally endowed with a round waist, a broad back, a fat face, a square
mouth; added to this, his eyebrows were swordlike, his eyes resembled
stars, his nose was straight, his cheeks square.

This servant girl turned away in a hurry and made her escape.

"This man so burly and strong," she communed within herself, "yet at the
same time got up in such poor attire, must, I expect, be no one else
than the man, whose name is Chia Yue-ts'un or such like, time after time
referred to by my master, and to whom he has repeatedly wished to give a
helping hand, but has failed to find a favourable opportunity. And as
related to our family there is no connexion or friend in such straits, I
feel certain it cannot be any other person than he. Strange to say, my
master has further remarked that this man will, for a certainty, not
always continue in such a state of destitution."

As she indulged in this train of thought, she could not restrain herself
from turning her head round once or twice.

When Yue-ts'un perceived that she had looked back, he readily interpreted
it as a sign that in her heart her thoughts had been of him, and he was
frantic with irrepressible joy.

"This girl," he mused, "is, no doubt, keen-eyed and eminently shrewd,
and one in this world who has seen through me."

The servant youth, after a short time, came into the room; and when
Yue-ts'un made inquiries and found out from him that the guests in the
front parlour had been detained to dinner, he could not very well wait
any longer, and promptly walked away down a side passage and out of a
back door.

When the guests had taken their leave, Shih-yin did not go back to
rejoin Yue-ts'un, as he had come to know that he had already left.

In time the mid-autumn festivities drew near; and Shih-yin, after the
family banquet was over, had a separate table laid in the library, and
crossed over, in the moonlight, as far as the temple and invited
Yue-ts'un to come round.

The fact is that Yue-ts'un, ever since the day on which he had seen the
girl of the Chen family turn twice round to glance at him, flattered
himself that she was friendly disposed towards him, and incessantly
fostered fond thoughts of her in his heart. And on this day, which
happened to be the mid-autumn feast, he could not, as he gazed at the
moon, refrain from cherishing her remembrance. Hence it was that he gave
vent to these pentameter verses:

  Alas! not yet divined my lifelong wish,
  And anguish ceaseless comes upon anguish
  I came, and sad at heart, my brow I frowned;
  She went, and oft her head to look turned round.
  Facing the breeze, her shadow she doth watch,
  Who's meet this moonlight night with her to match?
  The lustrous rays if they my wish but read
  Would soon alight upon her beauteous head!

Yue-ts'un having, after this recitation, recalled again to mind how that
throughout his lifetime his literary attainments had had an adverse fate
and not met with an opportunity (of reaping distinction), went on to rub
his brow, and as he raised his eyes to the skies, he heaved a deep sigh
and once more intoned a couplet aloud:

  The gem in the cask a high price it seeks,
  The pin in the case to take wing it waits.

As luck would have it, Shih-yin was at the moment approaching, and upon
hearing the lines, he said with a smile: "My dear Yue-ts'un, really your
attainments are of no ordinary capacity."

Yue-ts'un lost no time in smiling and replying. "It would be presumption
in my part to think so," he observed. "I was simply at random humming a
few verses composed by former writers, and what reason is there to laud
me to such an excessive degree? To what, my dear Sir, do I owe the
pleasure of your visit?" he went on to inquire. "Tonight," replied
Shih-yin, "is the mid-autumn feast, generally known as the full-moon
festival; and as I could not help thinking that living, as you my worthy
brother are, as a mere stranger in this Buddhist temple, you could not
but experience the feeling of loneliness. I have, for the express
purpose, prepared a small entertainment, and will be pleased if you will
come to my mean abode to have a glass of wine. But I wonder whether you
will entertain favourably my modest invitation?" Yue-ts'un, after
listening to the proposal, put forward no refusal of any sort; but
remarked complacently: "Being the recipient of such marked attention,
how can I presume to repel your generous consideration?"

As he gave expression to these words, he walked off there and then, in
company with Shih-yin, and came over once again into the court in front
of the library. In a few minutes, tea was over.

The cups and dishes had been laid from an early hour, and needless to
say the wines were luscious; the fare sumptuous.

The two friends took their seats. At first they leisurely replenished
their glasses, and quietly sipped their wine; but as, little by little,
they entered into conversation, their good cheer grew more genial, and
unawares the glasses began to fly round, and the cups to be exchanged.

At this very hour, in every house of the neighbourhood, sounded the fife
and lute, while the inmates indulged in music and singing. Above head,
the orb of the radiant moon shone with an all-pervading splendour, and
with a steady lustrous light, while the two friends, as their exuberance
increased, drained their cups dry so soon as they reached their lips.

Yue-ts'un, at this stage of the collation, was considerably under the
influence of wine, and the vehemence of his high spirits was
irrepressible. As he gazed at the moon, he fostered thoughts, to which
he gave vent by the recital of a double couplet.

  'Tis what time three meets five, Selene is a globe!
  Her pure rays fill the court, the jadelike rails enrobe!
  Lo! in the heavens her disk to view doth now arise,
  And in the earth below to gaze men lift their eyes.

"Excellent!" cried Shih-yin with a loud voice, after he had heard these
lines; "I have repeatedly maintained that it was impossible for you to
remain long inferior to any, and now the verses you have recited are a
prognostic of your rapid advancement. Already it is evident that, before
long, you will extend your footsteps far above the clouds! I must
congratulate you! I must congratulate you! Let me, with my own hands,
pour a glass of wine to pay you my compliments."

Yue-ts'un drained the cup. "What I am about to say," he explained as he
suddenly heaved a sigh, "is not the maudlin talk of a man under the
effects of wine. As far as the subjects at present set in the
examinations go, I could, perchance, also have well been able to enter
the list, and to send in my name as a candidate; but I have, just now,
no means whatever to make provision for luggage and for travelling
expenses. The distance too to Shen Ching is a long one, and I could not
depend upon the sale of papers or the composition of essays to find the
means of getting there."

Shih-yin gave him no time to conclude. "Why did you not speak about this
sooner?" he interposed with haste. "I have long entertained this
suspicion; but as, whenever I met you, this conversation was never
broached, I did not presume to make myself officious. But if such be the
state of affairs just now, I lack, I admit, literary qualification, but
on the two subjects of friendly spirit and pecuniary means, I have,
nevertheless, some experience. Moreover, I rejoice that next year is
just the season for the triennial examinations, and you should start for
the capital with all despatch; and in the tripos next spring, you will,
by carrying the prize, be able to do justice to the proficiency you can
boast of. As regards the travelling expenses and the other items, the
provision of everything necessary for you by my own self will again not
render nugatory your mean acquaintance with me."

Forthwith, he directed a servant lad to go and pack up at once fifty
taels of pure silver and two suits of winter clothes.

"The nineteenth," he continued, "is a propitious day, and you should
lose no time in hiring a boat and starting on your journey westwards.
And when, by your eminent talents, you shall have soared high to a lofty
position, and we meet again next winter, will not the occasion be
extremely felicitous?"

Yue-ts'un accepted the money and clothes with but scanty expression of
gratitude. In fact, he paid no thought whatever to the gifts, but went
on, again drinking his wine, as he chattered and laughed.

It was only when the third watch of that day had already struck that the
two friends parted company; and Shih-yin, after seeing Yue-ts'un off,
retired to his room and slept, with one sleep all through, never waking
until the sun was well up in the skies.

Remembering the occurrence of the previous night, he meant to write a
couple of letters of recommendation for Yue-ts'un to take along with him
to the capital, to enable him, after handing them over at the mansions
of certain officials, to find some place as a temporary home. He
accordingly despatched a servant to ask him to come round, but the man
returned and reported that from what the bonze said, "Mr. Chia had
started on his journey to the capital, at the fifth watch of that very
morning, that he had also left a message with the bonze to deliver to
you, Sir, to the effect that men of letters paid no heed to lucky or
unlucky days, that the sole consideration with them was the nature of
the matter in hand, and that he could find no time to come round in
person and bid good-bye."

Shih-yin after hearing this message had no alternative but to banish the
subject from his thoughts.

In comfortable circumstances, time indeed goes by with easy stride. Soon
drew near also the happy festival of the 15th of the 1st moon, and
Shih-yin told a servant Huo Ch'i to take Ying Lien to see the
sacrificial fires and flowery lanterns.

About the middle of the night, Huo Ch'i was hard pressed, and he
forthwith set Ying Lien down on the doorstep of a certain house. When he
felt relieved, he came back to take her up, but failed to find anywhere
any trace of Ying Lien. In a terrible plight, Huo Ch'i prosecuted his
search throughout half the night; but even by the dawn of day, he had
not discovered any clue of her whereabouts. Huo Ch'i, lacking, on the
other hand, the courage to go back and face his master, promptly made
his escape to his native village.

Shih-yin--in fact, the husband as well as the wife--seeing that their
child had not come home during the whole night, readily concluded that
some mishap must have befallen her. Hastily they despatched several
servants to go in search of her, but one and all returned to report that
there was neither vestige nor tidings of her.

This couple had only had this child, and this at the meridian of their
life, so that her sudden disappearance plunged them in such great
distress that day and night they mourned her loss to such a point as to
well nigh pay no heed to their very lives.

A month in no time went by. Shih-yin was the first to fall ill, and his
wife, Dame Feng, likewise, by dint of fretting for her daughter, was
also prostrated with sickness. The doctor was, day after day, sent for,
and the oracle consulted by means of divination.

Little did any one think that on this day, being the 15th of the 3rd
moon, while the sacrificial oblations were being prepared in the Hu Lu
temple, a pan with oil would have caught fire, through the want of care
on the part of the bonze, and that in a short time the flames would have
consumed the paper pasted on the windows.

Among the natives of this district bamboo fences and wooden partitions
were in general use, and these too proved a source of calamity so
ordained by fate (to consummate this decree).

With promptness (the fire) extended to two buildings, then enveloped
three, then dragged four (into ruin), and then spread to five houses,
until the whole street was in a blaze, resembling the flames of a
volcano. Though both the military and the people at once ran to the
rescue, the fire had already assumed a serious hold, so that it was
impossible for them to afford any effective assistance for its
suppression.

It blazed away straight through the night, before it was extinguished,
and consumed, there is in fact no saying how many dwelling houses.
Anyhow, pitiful to relate, the Chen house, situated as it was next door
to the temple, was, at an early part of the evening, reduced to a heap
of tiles and bricks; and nothing but the lives of that couple and
several inmates of the family did not sustain any injuries.

Shih-yin was in despair, but all he could do was to stamp his feet and
heave deep sighs. After consulting with his wife, they betook themselves
to a farm of theirs, where they took up their quarters temporarily. But
as it happened that water had of late years been scarce, and no crops
been reaped, robbers and thieves had sprung up like bees, and though the
Government troops were bent upon their capture, it was anyhow difficult
to settle down quietly on the farm. He therefore had no other resource
than to convert, at a loss, the whole of his property into money, and to
take his wife and two servant girls and come over for shelter to the
house of his father-in-law.

His father-in-law, Feng Su, by name, was a native of Ta Ju Chou.
Although only a labourer, he was nevertheless in easy circumstances at
home. When he on this occasion saw his son-in-law come to him in such
distress, he forthwith felt at heart considerable displeasure.
Fortunately Shih-yin had still in his possession the money derived from
the unprofitable realization of his property, so that he produced and
handed it to his father-in-law, commissioning him to purchase, whenever
a suitable opportunity presented itself, a house and land as a provision
for food and raiment against days to come. This Feng Su, however, only
expended the half of the sum, and pocketed the other half, merely
acquiring for him some fallow land and a dilapidated house.

Shih-yin being, on the other hand, a man of books and with no experience
in matters connected with business and with sowing and reaping,
subsisted, by hook and by crook, for about a year or two, when he became
more impoverished.

In his presence, Feng Su would readily give vent to specious utterances,
while, with others, and behind his back, he on the contrary expressed
his indignation against his improvidence in his mode of living, and
against his sole delight of eating and playing the lazy.

Shih-yin, aware of the want of harmony with his father-in-law, could not
help giving way, in his own heart, to feelings of regret and pain. In
addition to this, the fright and vexation which he had undergone the
year before, the anguish and suffering (he had had to endure), had
already worked havoc (on his constitution); and being a man advanced in
years, and assailed by the joint attack of poverty and disease, he at
length gradually began to display symptoms of decline.

Strange coincidence, as he, on this day, came leaning on his staff and
with considerable strain, as far as the street for a little relaxation,
he suddenly caught sight, approaching from the off side, of a Taoist
priest with a crippled foot; his maniac appearance so repulsive, his
shoes of straw, his dress all in tatters, muttering several sentiments
to this effect:

  All men spiritual life know to be good,
  But fame to disregard they ne'er succeed!
  From old till now the statesmen where are they?
  Waste lie their graves, a heap of grass, extinct.
  All men spiritual life know to be good,
  But to forget gold, silver, ill succeed!
  Through life they grudge their hoardings to be scant,
  And when plenty has come, their eyelids close.
  All men spiritual life hold to be good,
  Yet to forget wives, maids, they ne'er succeed!
  Who speak of grateful love while lives their lord,
  And dead their lord, another they pursue.
  All men spiritual life know to be good,
  But sons and grandsons to forget never succeed!
  From old till now of parents soft many,
  But filial sons and grandsons who have seen?

Shih-yin upon hearing these words, hastily came up to the priest, "What
were you so glibly holding forth?" he inquired. "All I could hear were a
lot of hao liao (excellent, finality.")

"You may well have heard the two words 'hao liao,'" answered the Taoist
with a smile, "but can you be said to have fathomed their meaning? You
should know that all things in this world are excellent, when they have
attained finality; when they have attained finality, they are excellent;
but when they have not attained finality, they are not excellent; if
they would be excellent, they should attain finality. My song is
entitled Excellent-finality (hao liao)."

Shih-yin was gifted with a natural perspicacity that enabled him, as
soon as he heard these remarks, to grasp their spirit.

"Wait a while," he therefore said smilingly; "let me unravel this
excellent-finality song of yours; do you mind?"

"Please by all means go on with the interpretation," urged the Taoist;
whereupon Shih-yin proceeded in this strain:

  Sordid rooms and vacant courts,
  Replete in years gone by with beds where statesmen lay;
  Parched grass and withered banian trees,
  Where once were halls for song and dance!
  Spiders' webs the carved pillars intertwine,
  The green gauze now is also pasted on the straw windows!
  What about the cosmetic fresh concocted or the powder just scented;
  Why has the hair too on each temple become white like hoarfrost!
  Yesterday the tumulus of yellow earth buried the bleached bones,
  To-night under the red silk curtain reclines the couple!
  Gold fills the coffers, silver fills the boxes,
  But in a twinkle, the beggars will all abuse you!
  While you deplore that the life of others is not long,
  You forget that you yourself are approaching death!
  You educate your sons with all propriety,
  But they may some day, 'tis hard to say become thieves;
  Though you choose (your fare and home) the fatted beam,
  You may, who can say, fall into some place of easy virtue!
  Through your dislike of the gauze hat as mean,
  You have come to be locked in a cangue;
  Yesterday, poor fellow, you felt cold in a tattered coat,
  To-day, you despise the purple embroidered dress as long!
  Confusion reigns far and wide! you have just sung your part, I come on
      the boards,
  Instead of yours, you recognise another as your native land;
  What utter perversion!
  In one word, it comes to this we make wedding clothes for others!
  (We sow for others to reap.)

The crazy limping Taoist clapped his hands. "Your interpretation is
explicit," he remarked with a hearty laugh, "your interpretation is
explicit!"

Shih-yin promptly said nothing more than,--"Walk on;" and seizing the
stole from the Taoist's shoulder, he flung it over his own. He did not,
however, return home, but leisurely walked away, in company with the
eccentric priest.

The report of his disappearance was at once bruited abroad, and plunged
the whole neighbourhood in commotion; and converted into a piece of
news, it was circulated from mouth to mouth.

Dame Feng, Shih-yin's wife, upon hearing the tidings, had such a fit of
weeping that she hung between life and death; but her only alternative
was to consult with her father, and to despatch servants on all sides to
institute inquiries. No news was however received of him, and she had
nothing else to do but to practise resignation, and to remain dependent
upon the support of her parents for her subsistence. She had fortunately
still by her side, to wait upon her, two servant girls, who had been
with her in days gone by; and the three of them, mistress as well as
servants, occupied themselves day and night with needlework, to assist
her father in his daily expenses.

This Feng Su had after all, in spite of his daily murmurings against his
bad luck, no help but to submit to the inevitable.

On a certain day, the elder servant girl of the Chen family was at the
door purchasing thread, and while there, she of a sudden heard in the
street shouts of runners clearing the way, and every one explain that
the new magistrate had come to take up his office.

The girl, as she peeped out from inside the door, perceived the lictors
and policemen go by two by two; and when unexpectedly in a state chair,
was carried past an official, in black hat and red coat, she was indeed
quite taken aback.

"The face of this officer would seem familiar," she argued within
herself; "just as if I had seen him somewhere or other ere this."

Shortly she entered the house, and banishing at once the occurrence from
her mind, she did not give it a second thought. At night, however, while
she was waiting to go to bed, she suddenly heard a sound like a rap at
the door. A band of men boisterously cried out: "We are messengers,
deputed by the worthy magistrate of this district, and come to summon
one of you to an enquiry."

Feng Su, upon hearing these words, fell into such a terrible
consternation that his eyes stared wide and his mouth gaped.

What calamity was impending is not as yet ascertained, but, reader,
listen to the explanation contained in the next chapter.




CHAPTER II.

  The spirit of Mrs. Chia Shih-yin departs from the town of Yang Chou.
  Leng Tzu-hsing dilates upon the Jung Kuo Mansion.


To continue. Feng Su, upon hearing the shouts of the public messengers,
came out in a flurry and forcing a smile, he asked them to explain
(their errand); but all these people did was to continue bawling out:
"Be quick, and ask Mr. Chen to come out."

"My surname is Feng," said Feng Su, as he promptly forced himself to
smile; "It is'nt Chen at all: I had once a son-in-law whose surname was
Chen, but he has left home, it is now already a year or two back. Is it
perchance about him that you are inquiring?"

To which the public servants remarked: "We know nothing about Chen or
Chia (true or false); but as he is your son-in-law, we'll take you at
once along with us to make verbal answer to our master and have done
with it."

And forthwith the whole bevy of public servants hustled Feng Su on, as
they went on their way back; while every one in the Feng family was
seized with consternation, and could not imagine what it was all about.

It was no earlier than the second watch, when Feng Su returned home; and
they, one and all, pressed him with questions as to what had happened.

"The fact is," he explained, "the newly-appointed Magistrate, whose
surname is Chia, whose name is Huo and who is a native of Hu-chow, has
been on intimate terms, in years gone by, with our son-in-law; that at
the sight of the girl Chiao Hsing, standing at the door, in the act of
buying thread, he concluded that he must have shifted his quarters over
here, and hence it was that his messengers came to fetch him. I gave him
a clear account of the various circumstances (of his misfortunes), and
the Magistrate was for a time much distressed and expressed his regret.
He then went on to make inquiries about my grand-daughter, and I
explained that she had been lost, while looking at the illuminations.
'No matter,' put in the Magistrate, 'I will by and by order my men to
make search, and I feel certain that they will find her and bring her
back.' Then ensued a short conversation, after which I was about to go,
when he presented me with the sum of two taels."

The mistress of the Chen family (Mrs. Chen Shih-yin) could not but feel
very much affected by what she heard, and the whole evening she uttered
not a word.

The next day, at an early hour, Yue-ts'un sent some of his men to bring
over to Chen's wife presents, consisting of two packets of silver, and
four pieces of brocaded silk, as a token of gratitude, and to Feng Su
also a confidential letter, requesting him to ask of Mrs. Chen her maid
Chiao Hsing to become his second wife.

Feng Su was so intensely delighted that his eyebrows expanded, his eyes
smiled, and he felt eager to toady to the Magistrate (by presenting the
girl to him). He hastened to employ all his persuasive powers with his
daughter (to further his purpose), and on the same evening he forthwith
escorted Chiao Hsing in a small chair to the Yamen.

The joy experienced by Yue-ts'un need not be dilated upon. He also
presented Feng Su with a packet containing one hundred ounces of gold;
and sent numerous valuable presents to Mrs. Chen, enjoining her "to live
cheerfully in the anticipation of finding out the whereabouts of her
daughter."

It must be explained, however, that the maid Chi'ao Hsing was the very
person, who, a few years ago, had looked round at Yue-ts'un and who, by
one simple, unpremeditated glance, evolved, in fact, this extraordinary
destiny which was indeed an event beyond conception.

Who would ever have foreseen that fate and fortune would both have so
favoured her that she should, contrary to all anticipation, give birth
to a son, after living with Yue-ts'un barely a year, that in addition to
this, after the lapse of another half year, Yue-ts'un's wife should have
contracted a sudden illness and departed this life, and that Yue-ts'un
should have at once raised her to the rank of first wife. Her destiny is
adequately expressed by the lines:

  Through but one single, casual look
  Soon an exalted place she took.

The fact is that after Yue-ts'un had been presented with the money by
Shih-yin, he promptly started on the 16th day for the capital, and at
the triennial great tripos, his wishes were gratified to the full.
Having successfully carried off his degree of graduate of the third
rank, his name was put by selection on the list for provincial
appointments. By this time, he had been raised to the rank of Magistrate
in this district; but, in spite of the excellence and sufficiency of his
accomplishments and abilities, he could not escape being ambitious and
overbearing. He failed besides, confident as he was in his own merits,
in respect toward his superiors, with the result that these officials
looked upon him scornfully with the corner of the eye.

A year had hardly elapsed, when he was readily denounced in a memorial
to the Throne by the High Provincial authorities, who represented that
he was of a haughty disposition, that he had taken upon himself to
introduce innovations in the rites and ceremonies, that overtly, while
he endeavoured to enjoy the reputation of probity and uprightness, he,
secretly, combined the nature of the tiger and wolf; with the
consequence that he had been the cause of much trouble in the district,
and that he had made life intolerable for the people, &c. &c.

The Dragon countenance of the Emperor was considerably incensed. His
Majesty lost no time in issuing commands, in reply to the Memorial, that
he should be deprived of his official status.

On the arrival of the despatch from the Board, great was the joy felt by
every officer, without exception, of the prefecture in which he had held
office. Yue-ts'un, though at heart intensely mortified and incensed,
betrayed not the least outward symptom of annoyance, but still
preserved, as of old, a smiling and cheerful countenance.

He handed over charge of all official business and removed the savings
which he had accumulated during the several years he had been in office,
his family and all his chattels to his original home; where, after
having put everything in proper order, he himself travelled (carried the
winds and sleeved the moon) far and wide, visiting every relic of note
in the whole Empire.

As luck would have it, on a certain day while making a second journey
through the Wei Yang district, he heard the news that the Salt
Commissioner appointed this year was Lin Ju-hai. This Lin Ju-hai's
family name was Lin, his name Hai and his style Ju-hai. He had obtained
the third place in the previous triennial examination, and had, by this
time, already risen to the rank of Director of the Court of Censors. He
was a native of Ku Su. He had been recently named by Imperial
appointment a Censor attached to the Salt Inspectorate, and had arrived
at his post only a short while back.

In fact, the ancestors of Lin Ju-hai had, from years back, successively
inherited the title of Marquis, which rank, by its present descent to
Ju-hai, had already been enjoyed by five generations. When first
conferred, the hereditary right to the title had been limited to three
generations; but of late years, by an act of magnanimous favour and
generous beneficence, extraordinary bounty had been superadded; and on
the arrival of the succession to the father of Ju-hai, the right had
been extended to another degree. It had now descended to Ju-hai, who
had, besides this title of nobility, begun his career as a successful
graduate. But though his family had been through uninterrupted ages the
recipient of imperial bounties, his kindred had all been anyhow men of
culture.

The only misfortune had been that the several branches of the Lin family
had not been prolific, so that the numbers of its members continued
limited; and though there existed several households, they were all
however to Ju-hai no closer relatives than first cousins. Neither were
there any connections of the same lineage, or of the same parentage.

Ju-hai was at this date past forty; and had only had a son, who had died
the previous year, in the third year of his age. Though he had several
handmaids, he had not had the good fortune of having another son; but
this was too a matter that could not be remedied.

By his wife, nee Chia, he had a daughter, to whom the infant name of Tai
Yue was given. She was, at this time, in her fifth year. Upon her the
parents doated as much as if she were a brilliant pearl in the palm of
their hand. Seeing that she was endowed with natural gifts of
intelligence and good looks, they also felt solicitous to bestow upon
her a certain knowledge of books, with no other purpose than that of
satisfying, by this illusory way, their wishes of having a son to
nurture and of dispelling the anguish felt by them, on account of the
desolation and void in their family circle (round their knees).

But to proceed. Yue-ts'un, while sojourning at an inn, was unexpectedly
laid up with a violent chill. Finding on his recovery, that his funds
were not sufficient to pay his expenses, he was thinking of looking out
for some house where he could find a resting place when he suddenly came
across two friends acquainted with the new Salt Commissioner. Knowing
that this official was desirous to find a tutor to instruct his
daughter, they lost no time in recommending Yue-ts'un, who moved into the
Yamen.

His female pupil was youthful in years and delicate in physique, so that
her lessons were irregular. Besides herself, there were only two waiting
girls, who remained in attendance during the hours of study, so that
Yue-ts'un was spared considerable trouble and had a suitable opportunity
to attend to the improvement of his health.

In a twinkle, another year and more slipped by, and when least expected,
the mother of his ward, nee Chia, was carried away after a short
illness. His pupil (during her mother's sickness) was dutiful in her
attendance, and prepared the medicines for her use. (And after her
death,) she went into the deepest mourning prescribed by the rites, and
gave way to such excess of grief that, naturally delicate as she was,
her old complaint, on this account, broke out anew.

Being unable for a considerable time to prosecute her studies, Yue-ts'un
lived at leisure and had no duties to attend to. Whenever therefore the
wind was genial and the sun mild, he was wont to stroll at random, after
he had done with his meals.

On this particular day, he, by some accident, extended his walk beyond
the suburbs, and desirous to contemplate the nature of the rustic
scenery, he, with listless step, came up to a spot encircled by hills
and streaming pools, by luxuriant clumps of trees and thick groves of
bamboos. Nestling in the dense foliage stood a temple. The doors and
courts were in ruins. The walls, inner and outer, in disrepair. An
inscription on a tablet testified that this was the temple of Spiritual
Perception. On the sides of the door was also a pair of old and
dilapidated scrolls with the following enigmatical verses.

  Behind ample there is, yet to retract the hand, the mind heeds not,
      until.
  Before the mortal vision lies no path, when comes to turn the will.

"These two sentences," Yue-ts'un pondered after perusal, "although simple
in language, are profound in signification. I have previous to this
visited many a spacious temple, located on hills of note, but never have
I beheld an inscription referring to anything of the kind. The meaning
contained in these words must, I feel certain, owe their origin to the
experiences of some person or other; but there's no saying. But why
should I not go in and inquire for myself?"

Upon walking in, he at a glance caught sight of no one else, but of a
very aged bonze, of unkempt appearance, cooking his rice. When Yue-ts'un
perceived that he paid no notice, he went up to him and asked him one or
two questions, but as the old priest was dull of hearing and a dotard,
and as he had lost his teeth, and his tongue was blunt, he made most
irrelevant replies.

Yue-ts'un lost all patience with him, and withdrew again from the
compound with the intention of going as far as the village public house
to have a drink or two, so as to enhance the enjoyment of the rustic
scenery. With easy stride, he accordingly walked up to the place.
Scarcely had he passed the threshold of the public house, when he
perceived some one or other among the visitors who had been sitting
sipping their wine on the divan, jump up and come up to greet him, with
a face beaming with laughter.

"What a strange meeting! What a strange meeting!" he exclaimed aloud.

Yue-ts'un speedily looked at him, (and remembered) that this person had,
in past days, carried on business in a curio establishment in the
capital, and that his surname was Leng and his style Tzu-hsing.

A mutual friendship had existed between them during their sojourn, in
days of yore, in the capital; and as Yue-ts'un had entertained the
highest opinion of Leng Tzu-hsing, as being a man of action and of great
abilities, while this Leng Tzu-hsing, on the other hand, borrowed of the
reputation of refinement enjoyed by Yue-ts'un, the two had consequently
all along lived in perfect harmony and companionship.

"When did you get here?" Yue-ts'un eagerly inquired also smilingly. "I
wasn't in the least aware of your arrival. This unexpected meeting is
positively a strange piece of good fortune."

"I went home," Tzu-hsing replied, "about the close of last year, but now
as I am again bound to the capital, I passed through here on my way to
look up a friend of mine and talk some matters over. He had the kindness
to press me to stay with him for a couple of days longer, and as I after
all have no urgent business to attend to, I am tarrying a few days, but
purpose starting about the middle of the moon. My friend is busy to-day,
so I roamed listlessly as far as here, never dreaming of such a
fortunate meeting."

While speaking, he made Yue-ts'un sit down at the same table, and ordered
a fresh supply of wine and eatables; and as the two friends chatted of
one thing and another, they slowly sipped their wine.

The conversation ran on what had occurred after the separation, and
Yue-ts'un inquired, "Is there any news of any kind in the capital?"

"There's nothing new whatever," answered Tzu-hsing. "There is one thing
however: in the family of one of your worthy kinsmen, of the same name
as yourself, a trifling, but yet remarkable, occurrence has taken
place."

"None of my kindred reside in the capital," rejoined Yue-ts'un with a
smile. "To what can you be alluding?"

"How can it be that you people who have the same surname do not belong
to one clan?" remarked Tzu-hsing, sarcastically.

"In whose family?" inquired Yue-ts'un.

"The Chia family," replied Tzu-hsing smiling, "whose quarters are in the
Jung Kuo Mansion, does not after all reflect discredit upon the lintel
of your door, my venerable friend."

"What!" exclaimed Yue-ts'un, "did this affair take place in that family?
Were we to begin reckoning, we would find the members of my clan to be
anything but limited in number. Since the time of our ancestor Chia Fu,
who lived while the Eastern Han dynasty occupied the Throne, the
branches of our family have been numerous and flourishing; they are now
to be found in every single province, and who could, with any accuracy,
ascertain their whereabouts? As regards the Jung-kuo branch in
particular, their names are in fact inscribed on the same register as
our own, but rich and exalted as they are, we have never presumed to
claim them as our relatives, so that we have become more and more
estranged."

"Don't make any such assertions," Tzu-hsing remarked with a sigh, "the
present two mansions of Jung and Ning have both alike also suffered
reverses, and they cannot come up to their state of days of yore."

"Up to this day, these two households of Ning and of Jung," Yue-ts'un
suggested, "still maintain a very large retinue of people, and how can
it be that they have met with reverses?"

"To explain this would be indeed a long story," said Leng Tzu-hsing.
"Last year," continued Yue-ts'un, "I arrived at Chin Ling, as I
entertained a wish to visit the remains of interest of the six
dynasties, and as I on that day entered the walled town of Shih T'ou, I
passed by the entrance of that old residence. On the east side of the
street, stood the Ning Kuo mansion; on the west the Jung Kuo mansion;
and these two, adjoining each other as they do, cover in fact well-nigh
half of the whole length of the street. Outside the front gate
everything was, it is true, lonely and deserted; but at a glance into
the interior over the enclosing wall, I perceived that the halls,
pavilions, two-storied structures and porches presented still a majestic
and lofty appearance. Even the flower garden, which extends over the
whole area of the back grounds, with its trees and rockeries, also
possessed to that day an air of luxuriance and freshness, which betrayed
no signs of a ruined or decrepid establishment."

"You have had the good fortune of starting in life as a graduate,"
explained Tzu-tsing as he smiled, "and yet are not aware of the saying
uttered by some one of old: that a centipede even when dead does not lie
stiff. (These families) may, according to your version, not be up to the
prosperity of former years, but, compared with the family of an ordinary
official, their condition anyhow presents a difference. Of late the
number of the inmates has, day by day, been on the increase; their
affairs have become daily more numerous; of masters and servants, high
and low, who live in ease and respectability very many there are; but of
those who exercise any forethought, or make any provision, there is not
even one. In their daily wants, their extravagances, and their
expenditure, they are also unable to adapt themselves to circumstances
and practise economy; (so that though) the present external framework
may not have suffered any considerable collapse, their purses have
anyhow begun to feel an exhausting process! But this is a mere trifle.
There is another more serious matter. Would any one ever believe that in
such families of official status, in a clan of education and culture,
the sons and grandsons of the present age would after all be each
(succeeding) generation below the standard of the former?"

Yue-ts'un, having listened to these remarks, observed: "How ever can it
be possible that families of such education and refinement can observe
any system of training and nurture which is not excellent? Concerning
the other branches, I am not in a position to say anything; but
restricting myself to the two mansions of Jung and Ning, they are those
in which, above all others, the education of their children is
methodical."

"I was just now alluding to none other than these two establishments,"
Tzu-hsing observed with a sigh; "but let me tell you all. In days of
yore, the duke of Ning Kuo and the duke of Jung Kuo were two uterine
brothers. The Ning duke was the elder; he had four sons. After the death
of the duke of Ning Kuo, his eldest son, Chia Tai-hua, came into the
title. He also had two sons; but the eldest, whose name was Hu, died at
the age of eight or nine; and the only survivor, the second son, Chia
Ching, inherited the title. His whole mind is at this time set upon
Taoist doctrines; his sole delight is to burn the pill and refine the
dual powers; while every other thought finds no place in his mind.
Happily, he had, at an early age, left a son, Chia Chen, behind in the
lay world, and his father, engrossed as his whole heart was with the
idea of attaining spiritual life, ceded the succession of the official
title to him. His parent is, besides, not willing to return to the
original family seat, but lives outside the walls of the capital,
foolishly hobnobbing with all the Taoist priests. This Mr. Chen had also
a son, Chia Jung, who is, at this period, just in his sixteenth year.
Mr. Ching gives at present no attention to anything at all, so that Mr.
Chen naturally devotes no time to his studies, but being bent upon
nought else but incessant high pleasure, he has subversed the order of
things in the Ning Kuo mansion, and yet no one can summon the courage to
come and hold him in check. But I'll now tell you about the Jung mansion
for your edification. The strange occurrence, to which I alluded just
now, came about in this manner. After the demise of the Jung duke, the
eldest son, Chia Tai-shan, inherited the rank. He took to himself as
wife, the daughter of Marquis Shih, a noble family of Chin Ling, by whom
he had two sons; the elder being Chia She, the younger Chia Cheng. This
Tai Shan is now dead long ago; but his wife is still alive, and the
elder son, Chia She, succeeded to the degree. He is a man of amiable and
genial disposition, but he likewise gives no thought to the direction of
any domestic concern. The second son Chia Cheng displayed, from his
early childhood, a great liking for books, and grew up to be correct and
upright in character. His grandfather doated upon him, and would have
had him start in life through the arena of public examinations, but,
when least expected, Tai-shan, being on the point of death, bequeathed a
petition, which was laid before the Emperor. His Majesty, out of regard
for his former minister, issued immediate commands that the elder son
should inherit the estate, and further inquired how many sons there were
besides him, all of whom he at once expressed a wish to be introduced in
his imperial presence. His Majesty, moreover, displayed exceptional
favour, and conferred upon Mr. Cheng the brevet rank of second class
Assistant Secretary (of a Board), and commanded him to enter the Board
to acquire the necessary experience. He has already now been promoted to
the office of second class Secretary. This Mr. Cheng's wife, nee Wang,
first gave birth to a son called Chia Chu, who became a Licentiate in
his fourteenth year. At barely twenty, he married, but fell ill and died
soon after the birth of a son. Her (Mrs. Cheng's) second child was a
daughter, who came into the world, by a strange coincidence, on the
first day of the year. She had an unexpected (pleasure) in the birth,
the succeeding year, of another son, who, still more remarkable to say,
had, at the time of his birth, a piece of variegated and crystal-like
brilliant jade in his mouth, on which were yet visible the outlines of
several characters. Now, tell me, was not this a novel and strange
occurrence? eh?"

"Strange indeed!" exclaimed Yue-ts'un with a smile; "but I presume the
coming experiences of this being will not be mean."

Tzu-hsing gave a faint smile. "One and all," he remarked, "entertain the
same idea. Hence it is that his mother doats upon him like upon a
precious jewel. On the day of his first birthday, Mr. Cheng readily
entertained a wish to put the bent of his inclinations to the test, and
placed before the child all kinds of things, without number, for him to
grasp from. Contrary to every expectation, he scorned every other
object, and, stretching forth his hand, he simply took hold of rouge,
powder and a few hair-pins, with which he began to play. Mr. Cheng
experienced at once displeasure, as he maintained that this youth would,
by and bye, grow up into a sybarite, devoted to wine and women, and for
this reason it is, that he soon began to feel not much attachment for
him. But his grandmother is the one who, in spite of everything, prizes
him like the breath of her own life. The very mention of what happened
is even strange! He is now grown up to be seven or eight years old, and,
although exceptionally wilful, in intelligence and precocity, however,
not one in a hundred could come up to him! And as for the utterances of
this child, they are no less remarkable. The bones and flesh of woman,
he argues, are made of water, while those of man of mud. 'Women to my
eyes are pure and pleasing,' he says, 'while at the sight of man, I
readily feel how corrupt, foul and repelling they are!' Now tell me, are
not these words ridiculous? There can be no doubt whatever that he will
by and bye turn out to be a licentious roue."

Yue-ts'un, whose countenance suddenly assumed a stern air, promptly
interrupted the conversation. "It doesn't quite follow," he suggested.
"You people don't, I regret to say, understand the destiny of this
child. The fact is that even the old Hanlin scholar Mr. Cheng was
erroneously looked upon as a loose rake and dissolute debauchee! But
unless a person, through much study of books and knowledge of letters,
so increases (in lore) as to attain the talent of discerning the nature
of things, and the vigour of mind to fathom the Taoist reason as well as
to comprehend the first principle, he is not in a position to form any
judgment."

Tzu-hsing upon perceiving the weighty import of what he propounded,
"Please explain," he asked hastily, "the drift (of your argument)." To
which Yue-ts'un responded: "Of the human beings created by the operation
of heaven and earth, if we exclude those who are gifted with extreme
benevolence and extreme viciousness, the rest, for the most part,
present no striking diversity. If they be extremely benevolent, they
fall in, at the time of their birth, with an era of propitious fortune;
while those extremely vicious correspond, at the time of their
existence, with an era of calamity. When those who coexist with
propitious fortune come into life, the world is in order; when those who
coexist with unpropitious fortune come into life, the world is in
danger. Yao, Shun, Yue, Ch'eng T'ang, Wen Wang, Wu Wang, Chou Kung, Chao
Kung, Confucius, Mencius, T'ung Hu, Han Hsin, Chou Tzu, Ch'eng Tzu, Chu
Tzu and Chang Tzu were ordained to see light in an auspicious era.
Whereas Ch'i Yu, Kung Kung, Chieh Wang, Chou Wang, Shih Huang, Wang
Mang, Tsao Ts'ao, Wen Wen, An Hu-shan, Ch'in Kuei and others were one
and all destined to come into the world during a calamitous age. Those
endowed with extreme benevolence set the world in order; those possessed
of extreme maliciousness turn the world into disorder. Purity,
intelligence, spirituality and subtlety constitute the vital spirit of
right which pervades heaven and earth, and the persons gifted with
benevolence are its natural fruit. Malignity and perversity constitute
the spirit of evil, which permeates heaven and earth, and malicious
persons are affected by its influence. The days of perpetual happiness
and eminent good fortune, and the era of perfect peace and tranquility,
which now prevail, are the offspring of the pure, intelligent, divine
and subtle spirit which ascends above, to the very Emperor, and below
reaches the rustic and uncultured classes. Every one is without
exception under its influence. The superfluity of the subtle spirit
expands far and wide, and finding nowhere to betake itself to, becomes,
in due course, transformed into dew, or gentle breeze; and, by a process
of diffusion, it pervades the whole world.

"The spirit of malignity and perversity, unable to expand under the
brilliant sky and transmuting sun, eventually coagulates, pervades and
stops up the deep gutters and extensive caverns; and when of a sudden
the wind agitates it or it be impelled by the clouds, and any slight
disposition, on its part, supervenes to set itself in motion, or to
break its bounds, and so little as even the minutest fraction does
unexpectedly find an outlet, and happens to come across any spirit of
perception and subtlety which may be at the time passing by, the spirit
of right does not yield to the spirit of evil, and the spirit of evil is
again envious of the spirit of right, so that the two do not harmonize.
Just like wind, water, thunder and lightning, which, when they meet in
the bowels of the earth, must necessarily, as they are both to dissolve
and are likewise unable to yield, clash and explode to the end that they
may at length exhaust themselves. Hence it is that these spirits have
also forcibly to diffuse themselves into the human race to find an
outlet, so that they may then completely disperse, with the result that
men and women are suddenly imbued with these spirits and spring into
existence. At best, (these human beings) cannot be generated into
philanthropists or perfect men; at worst, they cannot also embody
extreme perversity or extreme wickedness. Yet placed among one million
beings, the spirit of intelligence, refinement, perception and subtlety
will be above these one million beings; while, on the other hand, the
perverse, depraved and inhuman embodiment will likewise be below the
million of men. Born in a noble and wealthy family, these men will be a
salacious, lustful lot; born of literary, virtuous or poor parentage,
they will turn out retired scholars or men of mark; though they may by
some accident be born in a destitute and poverty-stricken home, they
cannot possibly, in fact, ever sink so low as to become runners or
menials, or contentedly brook to be of the common herd or to be driven
and curbed like a horse in harness. They will become, for a certainty,
either actors of note or courtesans of notoriety; as instanced in former
years by Hsue Yu, T'ao Ch'ien, Yuan Chi, Chi Kang, Liu Ling, the two
families of Wang and Hsieh, Ku Hu-t'ou, Ch'en Hou-chu, T'ang Ming-huang,
Sung Hui-tsung, Liu T'ing-chih, Wen Fei-ching, Mei Nan-kung, Shih
Man-ch'ing, Lui C'hih-ch'ing and Chin Shao-yu, and exemplified
now-a-days by Ni Yuen-lin, T'ang Po-hu, Chu Chih-shan, and also by Li
Kuei-men, Huang P'an-cho, Ching Hsin-mo, Cho Wen-chuen; and the women
Hung Fu, Hsieh T'ao, Ch'ue Ying, Ch'ao Yuen and others; all of whom were
and are of the same stamp, though placed in different scenes of action."

"From what you say," observed Tzu-hsing, "success makes (a man) a duke
or a marquis; ruin, a thief!"

"Quite so; that's just my idea!" replied Yue-ts'un; "I've not as yet let
you know that after my degradation from office, I spent the last couple
of years in travelling for pleasure all over each province, and that I
also myself came across two extraordinary youths. This is why, when a
short while back you alluded to this Pao-yue, I at once conjectured, with
a good deal of certainty, that he must be a human being of the same
stamp. There's no need for me to speak of any farther than the walled
city of Chin Ling. This Mr. Chen was, by imperial appointment, named
Principal of the Government Public College of the Chin Ling province. Do
you perhaps know him?"

"Who doesn't know him?" remarked Tzu-hsing. "This Chen family is an old
connection of the Chia family. These two families were on terms of great
intimacy, and I myself likewise enjoyed the pleasure of their friendship
for many a day."

"Last year, when at Chin Ling," Yue-ts'un continued with a smile, "some
one recommended me as resident tutor to the school in the Chen mansion;
and when I moved into it I saw for myself the state of things. Who would
ever think that that household was grand and luxurious to such a degree!
But they are an affluent family, and withal full of propriety, so that a
school like this was of course not one easy to obtain. The pupil,
however, was, it is true, a young tyro, but far more troublesome to
teach than a candidate for the examination of graduate of the second
degree. Were I to enter into details, you would indeed have a laugh. 'I
must needs,' he explained, 'have the company of two girls in my studies
to enable me to read at all, and to keep likewise my brain clear.
Otherwise, if left to myself, my head gets all in a muddle.' Time after
time, he further expounded to his young attendants, how extremely
honourable and extremely pure were the two words representing woman,
that they are more valuable and precious than the auspicious animal, the
felicitous bird, rare flowers and uncommon plants. 'You may not' (he was
wont to say), 'on any account heedlessly utter them, you set of foul
mouths and filthy tongues! these two words are of the utmost import!
Whenever you have occasion to allude to them, you must, before you can
do so with impunity, take pure water and scented tea and rinse your
mouths. In the event of any slip of the tongue, I shall at once have
your teeth extracted, and your eyes gouged out.' His obstinacy and
waywardness are, in every respect, out of the common. After he was
allowed to leave school, and to return home, he became, at the sight of
the young ladies, so tractable, gentle, sharp, and polite, transformed,
in fact, like one of them. And though, for this reason, his father has
punished him on more than one occasion, by giving him a sound thrashing,
such as brought him to the verge of death, he cannot however change.
Whenever he was being beaten, and could no more endure the pain, he was
wont to promptly break forth in promiscuous loud shouts, 'Girls! girls!'
The young ladies, who heard him from the inner chambers, subsequently
made fun of him. 'Why,' they said, 'when you are being thrashed, and you
are in pain, your only thought is to bawl out girls! Is it perchance
that you expect us young ladies to go and intercede for you? How is that
you have no sense of shame?' To their taunts he gave a most plausible
explanation. 'Once,' he replied, 'when in the agony of pain, I gave vent
to shouting girls, in the hope, perchance, I did not then know, of its
being able to alleviate the soreness. After I had, with this purpose,
given one cry, I really felt the pain considerably better; and now that
I have obtained this secret spell, I have recourse, at once, when I am
in the height of anguish, to shouts of girls, one shout after another.
Now what do you say to this? Isn't this absurd, eh?"

"The grandmother is so infatuated by her extreme tenderness for this
youth, that, time after time, she has, on her grandson's account, found
fault with the tutor, and called her son to task, with the result that I
resigned my post and took my leave. A youth, with a disposition such as
his, cannot assuredly either perpetuate intact the estate of his father
and grandfather, or follow the injunctions of teacher or advice of
friends. The pity is, however, that there are, in that family, several
excellent female cousins, the like of all of whom it would be difficult
to discover."

"Quite so!" remarked Tzu-hsing; "there are now three young ladies in the
Chia family who are simply perfection itself. The eldest is a daughter
of Mr. Cheng, Yuan Ch'un by name, who, on account of her excellence,
filial piety, talents, and virtue, has been selected as a governess in
the palace. The second is the daughter of Mr. She's handmaid, and is
called Ying Ch'un; the third is T'an Ch'un, the child of Mr. Cheng's
handmaid; while the fourth is the uterine sister of Mr. Chen of the Ning
Mansion. Her name is Hsi Ch'un. As dowager lady Shih is so fondly
attached to her granddaughters, they come, for the most part, over to
their grandmother's place to prosecute their studies together, and each
one of these girls is, I hear, without a fault."

"More admirable," observed Yue-ts'un, "is the regime (adhered to) in the
Chen family, where the names of the female children have all been
selected from the list of male names, and are unlike all those
out-of-the-way names, such as Spring Blossom, Scented Gem, and the like
flowery terms in vogue in other families. But how is it that the Chia
family have likewise fallen into this common practice?"

"Not so!" ventured Tzu-h'sing. "It is simply because the eldest daughter
was born on the first of the first moon, that the name of Yuan Ch'un was
given to her; while with the rest this character Ch'un (spring) was then
followed. The names of the senior generation are, in like manner,
adopted from those of their brothers; and there is at present an
instance in support of this. The wife of your present worthy master, Mr.
Lin, is the uterine sister of Mr. Chia. She and Mr. Chia Cheng, and she
went, while at home, under the name of Chia Min. Should you question the
truth of what I say, you are at liberty, on your return, to make minute
inquiries and you'll be convinced."

Yue-ts'un clapped his hands and said smiling, "It's so, I know! for this
female pupil of mine, whose name is Tai-yue, invariably pronounces the
character _min_ as _mi_, whenever she comes across it in the
course of her reading; while, in writing, when she comes to the
character 'min,' she likewise reduces the strokes by one, sometimes by
two. Often have I speculated in my mind (as to the cause), but the
remarks I've heard you mention, convince me, without doubt, that it is
no other reason (than that of reverence to her mother's name). Strange
enough, this pupil of mine is unique in her speech and deportment, and
in no way like any ordinary young lady. But considering that her mother
was no commonplace woman herself, it is natural that she should have
given birth to such a child. Besides, knowing, as I do now, that she is
the granddaughter of the Jung family, it is no matter of surprise to me
that she is what she is. Poor girl, her mother, after all, died in the
course of the last month."

Tzu-hsing heaved a sigh. "Of three elderly sisters," he explained, "this
one was the youngest, and she too is gone! Of the sisters of the senior
generation not one even survives! But now we'll see what the husbands of
this younger generation will be like by and bye!"

"Yes," replied Yue-ts'un. "But some while back you mentioned that Mr.
Cheng has had a son, born with a piece of jade in his mouth, and that he
has besides a tender-aged grandson left by his eldest son; but is it
likely that this Mr. She has not, himself, as yet, had any male issue?"

"After Mr. Cheng had this son with the jade," Tzu-hsing added, "his
handmaid gave birth to another son, who whether he be good or bad, I
don't at all know. At all events, he has by his side two sons and a
grandson, but what these will grow up to be by and bye, I cannot tell.
As regards Mr. Chia She, he too has had two sons; the second of whom,
Chia Lien, is by this time about twenty. He took to wife a relative of
his, a niece of Mr. Cheng's wife, a Miss Wang, and has now been married
for the last two years. This Mr. Lien has lately obtained by purchase
the rank of sub-prefect. He too takes little pleasure in books, but as
far as worldly affairs go, he is so versatile and glib of tongue, that
he has recently taken up his quarters with his uncle Mr. Cheng, to whom
he gives a helping hand in the management of domestic matters. Who would
have thought it, however, ever since his marriage with his worthy wife,
not a single person, whether high or low, has there been who has not
looked up to her with regard: with the result that Mr. Lien himself has,
in fact, had to take a back seat (_lit_. withdrew 35 li). In looks,
she is also so extremely beautiful, in speech so extremely quick and
fluent, in ingenuity so deep and astute, that even a man could, in no
way, come up to her mark."

After hearing these remarks Yue-ts'un smiled. "You now perceive," he
said, "that my argument is no fallacy, and that the several persons
about whom you and I have just been talking are, we may presume, human
beings, who, one and all, have been generated by the spirit of right,
and the spirit of evil, and come to life by the same royal road; but of
course there's no saying."

"Enough," cried Tzu-hsing, "of right and enough of evil; we've been
doing nothing but settling other people's accounts; come now, have
another glass, and you'll be the better for it!"

"While bent upon talking," Yue-ts'un explained, "I've had more glasses
than is good for me."

"Speaking of irrelevant matters about other people," Tzu-hsing rejoined
complacently, "is quite the thing to help us swallow our wine; so come
now; what harm will happen, if we do have a few glasses more."

Yue-ts'un thereupon looked out of the window.

"The day is also far advanced," he remarked, "and if we don't take care,
the gates will be closing; let us leisurely enter the city, and as we go
along, there will be nothing to prevent us from continuing our chat."

Forthwith the two friends rose from their seats, settled and paid their
wine bill, and were just going, when they unexpectedly heard some one
from behind say with a loud voice:

"Accept my congratulations, Brother Yue-ts'un; I've now come, with the
express purpose of giving you the welcome news!"

Yue-ts'un lost no time in turning his head round to look at the speaker.
But reader, if you wish to learn who the man was, listen to the details
given in the following chapter.




CHAPTER III.

  Lin Ju-hai appeals to his brother-in-law, Chia Cheng, recommending
      Yue-ts'un, his daughter's tutor, to his consideration.
  Dowager lady Chia sends to fetch her granddaughter, out of
      commiseration for her being a motherless child.


But to proceed with our narrative.

Yue-ts'un, on speedily turning round, perceived that the speaker was no
other than a certain Chang Ju-kuei, an old colleague of his, who had
been denounced and deprived of office, on account of some case or other;
a native of that district, who had, since his degradation, resided in
his family home.

Having lately come to hear the news that a memorial, presented in the
capital, that the former officers (who had been cashiered) should be
reinstated, had received the imperial consent, he had promptly done all
he could, in every nook and corner, to obtain influence, and to find the
means (of righting his position,) when he, unexpectedly, came across
Yue-ts'un, to whom he therefore lost no time in offering his
congratulations. The two friends exchanged the conventional salutations,
and Chang Ju-kuei forthwith communicated the tidings to Yue-ts'un.

Yue-ts'un was delighted, but after he had made a few remarks, in a great
hurry, each took his leave and sped on his own way homewards.

Leng Tzu-hsing, upon hearing this conversation, hastened at once to
propose a plan, advising Yue-ts'un to request Lin Ju-hai, in his turn, to
appeal in the capital to Mr. Chia Cheng for support.

Yue-ts'un accepted the suggestion, and parted from his companion.

On his return to his quarters, he made all haste to lay his hand on the
Metropolitan Gazette, and having ascertained that the news was
authentic, he had on the next day a personal consultation with Ju-hai.

"Providence and good fortune are both alike propitious!" exclaimed
Ju-hai. "After the death of my wife, my mother-in-law, whose residence
is in the capital, was so very solicitous on my daughter's account, for
having no one to depend upon, that she despatched, at an early period,
boats with men and women servants to come and fetch her. But my child
was at the time not quite over her illness, and that is why she has not
yet started. I was, this very moment, cogitating to send my daughter to
the capital. And in view of the obligation, under which I am to you for
the instruction you have heretofore conferred upon her, remaining as yet
unrequited, there is no reason why, when such an opportunity as this
presents itself, I should not do my utmost to find means to make proper
acknowledgment. I have already, in anticipation, given the matter my
attention, and written a letter of recommendation to my brother-in-law,
urging him to put everything right for you, in order that I may, to a
certain extent, be able to give effect to my modest wishes. As for any
outlay that may prove necessary, I have given proper explanation, in the
letter to my brother-in-law, so that you, my brother, need not trouble
yourself by giving way to much anxiety."

As Yue-ts'un bowed and expressed his appreciation in most profuse
language,--

"Pray," he asked, "where does your honoured brother-in-law reside? and
what is his official capacity? But I fear I'm too coarse in my manner,
and could not presume to obtrude myself in his presence."

Ju-hai smiled. "And yet," he remarked, "this brother-in-law of mine is
after all of one and the same family as your worthy self, for he is the
grandson of the Duke Jung. My elder brother-in-law has now inherited the
status of Captain-General of the first grade. His name is She, his style
Ngen-hou. My second brother-in-law's name is Cheng, his style is
Tzu-chou. His present post is that of a Second class Secretary in the
Board of Works. He is modest and kindhearted, and has much in him of the
habits of his grandfather; not one of that purse-proud and haughty kind
of men. That is why I have written to him and made the request on your
behalf. Were he different to what he really is, not only would he cast a
slur upon your honest purpose, honourable brother, but I myself likewise
would not have been as prompt in taking action."

When Yue-ts'un heard these remarks, he at length credited what had been
told him by Tzu-hsing the day before, and he lost no time in again
expressing his sense of gratitude to Lin Ju-hai.

Ju-hai resumed the conversation.

"I have fixed," (he explained,) "upon the second of next month, for my
young daughter's departure for the capital, and, if you, brother mine,
were to travel along with her, would it not be an advantage to herself,
as well as to yourself?"

Yue-ts'un signified his acquiescence as he listened to his proposal;
feeling in his inner self extremely elated.

Ju-hai availed himself of the earliest opportunity to get ready the
presents (for the capital) and all the requirements for the journey,
which (when completed,) Yue-ts'un took over one by one. His pupil could
not, at first, brook the idea, of a separation from her father, but the
pressing wishes of her grandmother left her no course (but to comply).

"Your father," Ju-hai furthermore argued with her, "is already fifty;
and I entertain no wish to marry again; and then you are always ailing;
besides, with your extreme youth, you have, above, no mother of your own
to take care of you, and below, no sisters to attend to you. If you now
go and have your maternal grandmother, as well as your mother's brothers
and your cousins to depend upon, you will be doing the best thing to
reduce the anxiety which I feel in my heart on your behalf. Why then
should you not go?"

Tai-yue, after listening to what her father had to say, parted from him
in a flood of tears and followed her nurse and several old matrons from
the Jung mansion on board her boat, and set out on her journey.

Yue-ts'un had a boat to himself, and with two youths to wait on him, he
prosecuted his voyage in the wake of Tai-yue.

By a certain day, they reached Ching Tu; and Yue-ts'un, after first
adjusting his hat and clothes, came, attended by a youth, to the door of
the Jung mansion, and sent in a card, which showed his lineage.

Chia Cheng had, by this time, perused his brother-in-law's letter, and
he speedily asked him to walk in. When they met, he found in Yue-ts'un an
imposing manner and polite address.

This Chia Cheng had, in fact, a great penchant above all things for men
of education, men courteous to the talented, respectful to the learned,
ready to lend a helping hand to the needy and to succour the distressed,
and was, to a great extent, like his grandfather. As it was besides a
wish intimated by his brother-in-law, he therefore treated Yue-ts'un with
a consideration still more unusual, and readily strained all his
resources to assist him.

On the very day on which the memorial was submitted to the Throne, he
obtained by his efforts, a reinstatement to office, and before the
expiry of two months, Yue-t'sun was forthwith selected to fill the
appointment of prefect of Ying T'ien in Chin Ling. Taking leave of Chia
Cheng, he chose a propitious day, and proceeded to his post, where we
will leave him without further notice for the present.

But to return to Tai-yue. On the day on which she left the boat, and the
moment she put her foot on shore, there were forthwith at her disposal
chairs for her own use, and carts for the luggage, sent over from the
Jung mansion.

Lin Tai-yue had often heard her mother recount how different was her
grandmother's house from that of other people's; and having seen for
herself how above the common run were already the attendants of the
three grades, (sent to wait upon her,) in attire, in their fare, in all
their articles of use, "how much more," (she thought to herself) "now
that I am going to her home, must I be careful at every step, and
circumspect at every moment! Nor must I utter one word too many, nor
make one step more than is proper, for fear lest I should be ridiculed
by any of them!"

From the moment she got into the chair, and they had entered within the
city walls, she found, as she looked around, through the gauze window,
at the bustle in the streets and public places and at the immense
concourse of people, everything naturally so unlike what she had seen
elsewhere.

After they had also been a considerable time on the way, she suddenly
caught sight, at the northern end of the street, of two huge squatting
lions of marble and of three lofty gates with (knockers representing)
the heads of animals. In front of these gates, sat, in a row, about ten
men in coloured hats and fine attire. The main gate was not open. It was
only through the side gates, on the east and west, that people went in
and came out. Above the centre gate was a tablet. On this tablet were
inscribed in five large characters--"The Ning Kuo mansion erected by
imperial command."

"This must be grandmother's eldest son's residence," reflected Tai-yue.

Towards the east, again, at no great distance, were three more high
gateways, likewise of the same kind as those she had just seen. This was
the Jung Kuo mansion.

They did not however go in by the main gate; but simply made their
entrance through the east side door.

With the sedans on their shoulders, (the bearers) proceeded about the
distance of the throw of an arrow, when upon turning a corner, they
hastily put down the chairs. The matrons, who came behind, one and all
also dismounted. (The bearers) were changed for four youths of seventeen
or eighteen, with hats and clothes without a blemish, and while they
carried the chair, the whole bevy of matrons followed on foot.

When they reached a creeper-laden gate, the sedan was put down, and all
the youths stepped back and retired. The matrons came forward, raised
the screen, and supported Tai-yue to descend from the chair.

Lin Tai-yue entered the door with the creepers, resting on the hand of a
matron.

On both sides was a verandah, like two outstretched arms. An Entrance
Hall stood in the centre, in the middle of which was a door-screen of Ta
Li marble, set in an ebony frame. On the other side of this screen were
three very small halls. At the back of these came at once an extensive
courtyard, belonging to the main building.

In the front part were five parlours, the frieze of the ceiling of which
was all carved, and the pillars ornamented. On either side, were covered
avenues, resembling passages through a rock. In the side-rooms were
suspended cages, full of parrots of every colour, thrushes, and birds of
every description.

On the terrace-steps, sat several waiting maids, dressed in red and
green, and the whole company of them advanced, with beaming faces, to
greet them, when they saw the party approach. "Her venerable ladyship,"
they said, "was at this very moment thinking of you, miss, and, by a
strange coincidence, here you are."

Three or four of them forthwith vied with each other in raising the door
curtain, while at the same time was heard some one announce: "Miss Lin
has arrived."

No sooner had she entered the room, than she espied two servants
supporting a venerable lady, with silver-white hair, coming forward to
greet her. Convinced that this lady must be her grandmother, she was
about to prostrate herself and pay her obeisance, when she was quickly
clasped in the arms of her grandmother, who held her close against her
bosom; and as she called her "my liver! my flesh!" (my love! my
darling!) she began to sob aloud.

The bystanders too, at once, without one exception, melted into tears;
and Tai-yue herself found some difficulty in restraining her sobs. Little
by little the whole party succeeded in consoling her, and Tai-yue at
length paid her obeisance to her grandmother. Her ladyship thereupon
pointed them out one by one to Tai-yue. "This," she said, "is the wife of
your uncle, your mother's elder brother; this is the wife of your uncle,
her second brother; and this is your eldest sister-in-law Chu, the wife
of your senior cousin Chu."

Tai-yue bowed to each one of them (with folded arms).

"Ask the young ladies in," dowager lady Chia went on to say; "tell them
a guest from afar has just arrived, one who comes for the first time;
and that they may not go to their lessons."

The servants with one voice signified their obedience, and two of them
speedily went to carry out her orders.

Not long after three nurses and five or six waiting-maids were seen
ushering in three young ladies. The first was somewhat plump in figure
and of medium height; her cheeks had a congealed appearance, like a
fresh lichee; her nose was glossy like goose fat. She was gracious,
demure, and lovable to look at.

The second had sloping shoulders, and a slim waist. Tall and slender was
she in stature, with a face like the egg of a goose. Her eyes so
beautiful, with their well-curved eyebrows, possessed in their gaze a
bewitching flash. At the very sight of her refined and elegant manners
all idea of vulgarity was forgotten.

The third was below the medium size, and her mien was, as yet,
childlike.

In their head ornaments, jewelry, and dress, the get-up of the three
young ladies was identical.

Tai-yue speedily rose to greet them and to exchange salutations. After
they had made each other's acquaintance, they all took a seat, whereupon
the servants brought the tea. Their conversation was confined to
Tai-yue's mother,--how she had fallen ill, what doctors had attended her,
what medicines had been given her, and how she had been buried and
mourned; and dowager lady Chia was naturally again in great anguish.

"Of all my daughters," she remarked, "your mother was the one I loved
best, and now in a twinkle, she has passed away, before me too, and I've
not been able to so much as see her face. How can this not make my heart
sore-stricken?"

And as she gave vent to these feelings, she took Tai-yue's hand in hers,
and again gave way to sobs; and it was only after the members of the
family had quickly made use of much exhortation and coaxing, that they
succeeded, little by little, in stopping her tears.

They all perceived that Tai-yue, despite her youthful years and
appearance, was lady-like in her deportment and address, and that though
with her delicate figure and countenance, (she seemed as if) unable to
bear the very weight of her clothes, she possessed, however, a certain
captivating air. And as they readily noticed the symptoms of a weak
constitution, they went on in consequence to make inquiries as to what
medicines she ordinarily took, and how it was that her complaint had not
been cured.

"I have," explained Tai-yue, "been in this state ever since I was born;
though I've taken medicines from the very time I was able to eat rice,
up to the present, and have been treated by ever so many doctors of
note, I've not derived any benefit. In the year when I was yet only
three, I remember a mangy-headed bonze coming to our house, and saying
that he would take me along, and make a nun of me; but my father and
mother would, on no account, give their consent. 'As you cannot bear to
part from her and to give her up,' he then remarked, 'her ailment will,
I fear, never, throughout her life, be cured. If you wish to see her all
right, it is only to be done by not letting her, from this day forward,
on any account, listen to the sound of weeping, or see, with the
exception of her parents, any relatives outside the family circle. Then
alone will she be able to go through this existence in peace and in
quiet.' No one heeded the nonsensical talk of this raving priest; but
here am I, up to this very day, dosing myself with ginseng pills as a
tonic."

"What a lucky coincidence!" interposed dowager lady Chia; "some of these
pills are being compounded here, and I'll simply tell them to have an
extra supply made; that's all."

Hardly had she finished these words, when a sound of laughter was heard
from the back courtyard. "Here I am too late!" the voice said, "and not
in time to receive the distant visitor!"

"Every one of all these people," reflected Tai-yue, "holds her peace and
suppresses the very breath of her mouth; and who, I wonder, is this
coming in this reckless and rude manner?"

While, as yet, preoccupied with these thoughts, she caught sight of a
crowd of married women and waiting-maids enter from the back room,
pressing round a regular beauty.

The attire of this person bore no similarity to that of the young
ladies. In all her splendour and lustre, she looked like a fairy or a
goddess. In her coiffure, she had a band of gold filigree work,
representing the eight precious things, inlaid with pearls; and wore
pins, at the head of each of which were five phoenixes in a rampant
position, with pendants of pearls. On her neck, she had a reddish gold
necklet, like coiled dragons, with a fringe of tassels. On her person,
she wore a tight-sleeved jacket, of dark red flowered satin, covered
with hundreds of butterflies, embroidered in gold, interspersed with
flowers. Over all, she had a variegated stiff-silk pelisse, lined with
slate-blue ermine; while her nether garments consisted of a jupe of
kingfisher-colour foreign crepe, brocaded with flowers.

She had a pair of eyes, triangular in shape like those of the red
phoenix, two eyebrows, curved upwards at each temple, like willow
leaves. Her stature was elegant; her figure graceful; her powdered face
like dawning spring, majestic, yet not haughty. Her carnation lips, long
before they parted, betrayed a smile.

Tai-yue eagerly rose and greeted her.

Old lady Chia then smiled. "You don't know her," she observed. "This is
a cunning vixen, who has made quite a name in this establishment! In
Nanking, she went by the appellation of vixen, and if you simply call
her Feng Vixen, it will do."

Tai-yue was just at a loss how to address her, when all her cousins
informed Tai-yue, that this was her sister-in-law Lien.

Tai-yue had not, it is true, made her acquaintance before, but she had
heard her mother mention that her eldest maternal uncle Chia She's son,
Chia Lien, had married the niece of Madame Wang, her second brother's
wife, a girl who had, from her infancy, purposely been nurtured to
supply the place of a son, and to whom the school name of Wang Hsi-feng
had been given.

Tai-yue lost no time in returning her smile and saluting her with all
propriety, addressing her as my sister-in-law. This Hsi-feng laid hold
of Tai-yue's hand, and minutely scrutinised her, for a while, from head
to foot; after which she led her back next to dowager lady Chia, where
they both took a seat.

"If really there be a being of such beauty in the world," she
consequently observed with a smile, "I may well consider as having set
eyes upon it to-day! Besides, in the air of her whole person, she
doesn't in fact look like your granddaughter-in-law, our worthy
ancestor, but in every way like your ladyship's own kindred-
granddaughter! It's no wonder then that your venerable ladyship
should have, day after day, had her unforgotten, even for a second, in
your lips and heart. It's a pity, however, that this cousin of mine
should have such a hard lot! How did it happen that our aunt died at
such an early period?"

As she uttered these words, she hastily took her handkerchief and wiped
the tears from her eyes.

"I've only just recovered from a fit of crying," dowager lady Chia
observed, as she smiled, "and have you again come to start me? Your
cousin has only now arrived from a distant journey, and she is so
delicate to boot! Besides, we have a few minutes back succeeded in
coaxing her to restrain her sobs, so drop at once making any allusion to
your former remarks!"

This Hsi-feng, upon hearing these words, lost no time in converting her
sorrow into joy.

"Quite right," she remarked. "But at the sight of my cousin, my whole
heart was absorbed in her, and I felt happy, and yet wounded at heart:
but having disregarded my venerable ancestor's presence, I deserve to be
beaten, I do indeed!"

And hastily taking once more Tai-yue's hand in her own: "How old are you,
cousin?" she inquired; "Have you been to school? What medicines are you
taking? while you live here, you mustn't feel homesick; and if there's
anything you would like to eat, or to play with, mind you come and tell
me! or should the waiting maids or the matrons fail in their duties,
don't forget also to report them to me."

Addressing at the same time the matrons, she went on to ask, "Have Miss
Lin's luggage and effects been brought in? How many servants has she
brought along with her? Go, as soon as you can, and sweep two lower
rooms and ask them to go and rest."

As she spake, tea and refreshments had already been served, and Hsi-feng
herself handed round the cups and offered the fruits.

Upon hearing the question further put by her maternal aunt Secunda,
"Whether the issue of the monthly allowances of money had been finished
or not yet?" Hsi-feng replied: "The issue of the money has also been
completed; but a few moments back, when I went along with several
servants to the back upper-loft, in search of the satins, we looked for
ever so long, but we saw nothing of the kind of satins alluded to by
you, madame, yesterday; so may it not be that your memory misgives you?"

"Whether there be any or not, of that special kind, is of no
consequence," observed madame Wang. "You should take out," she therefore
went on to add, "any two pieces which first come under your hand, for
this cousin of yours to make herself dresses with; and in the evening,
if I don't forget, I'll send some one to fetch them."

"I've in fact already made every provision," rejoined Hsi-feng; "knowing
very well that my cousin would be arriving within these two days, I have
had everything got ready for her. And when you, madame, go back, if you
will pass an eye over everything, I shall be able to send them round."

Madame Wang gave a smile, nodded her head assentingly, but uttered not a
word by way of reply.

The tea and fruit had by this time been cleared, and dowager lady Chia
directed two old nurses to take Tai-yue to go and see her two maternal
uncles; whereupon Chia She's wife, madame Hsing, hastily stood up and
with a smiling face suggested, "I'll take my niece over; for it will
after all be considerably better if I go!"

"Quite so!" answered dowager lady Chia, smiling; "you can go home too,
and there will be no need for you to come over again!"

Madame Hsing expressed her assent, and forthwith led Tai-yue to take
leave of madame Wang. The whole party escorted them as far as the door
of the Entrance Hall, hung with creepers, where several youths had drawn
a carriage, painted light blue, with a kingfisher-coloured hood.

Madame Hsing led Tai-yue by the hand and they got up into their seats.
The whole company of matrons put the curtain down, and then bade the
youths raise the carriage; who dragged it along, until they came to an
open space, where they at length put the mules into harness.

Going out again by the eastern side gate, they proceeded in an easterly
direction, passed the main entrance of the Jung mansion, and entered a
lofty doorway painted black. On the arrival in front of the ceremonial
gate, they at once dismounted from the curricle, and madame Hsing,
hand-in-hand with Tai-yue, walked into the court.

"These grounds," surmised Tai-yue to herself, "must have been originally
converted from a piece partitioned from the garden of the Jung mansion."

Having entered three rows of ceremonial gates they actually caught sight
of the main structure, with its vestibules and porches, all of which,
though on a small scale, were full of artistic and unique beauty. They
were nothing like the lofty, imposing, massive and luxurious style of
architecture on the other side, yet the avenues and rockeries, in the
various places in the court, were all in perfect taste.

When they reached the interior of the principal pavilion, a large
concourse of handmaids and waiting maids, got up in gala dress, were
already there to greet them. Madame Hsing pressed Tai-yue into a seat,
while she bade some one go into the outer library and request Mr. Chia
She to come over.

In a few minutes the servant returned. "Master," she explained, "says:
'that he has not felt quite well for several days, that as the meeting
with Miss Lin will affect both her as well as himself, he does not for
the present feel equal to seeing each other, that he advises Miss Lin
not to feel despondent or homesick; that she ought to feel quite at home
with her venerable ladyship, (her grandmother,) as well as her maternal
aunts; that her cousins are, it is true, blunt, but that if all the
young ladies associated together in one place, they may also perchance
dispel some dulness; that if ever (Miss Lin) has any grievance, she
should at once speak out, and on no account feel a stranger; and
everything will then be right."

Tai-yue lost no time in respectfully standing up, resuming her seat after
she had listened to every sentence of the message to her. After a while,
she said goodbye, and though madame Hsing used every argument to induce
her to stay for the repast and then leave, Tai-yue smiled and said, "I
shouldn't under ordinary circumstances refuse the invitation to dinner,
which you, aunt, in your love kindly extend to me, but I have still to
cross over and pay my respects to my maternal uncle Secundus; if I went
too late, it would, I fear, be a lack of respect on my part; but I shall
accept on another occasion. I hope therefore that you will, dear aunt,
kindly excuse me."

"If such be the case," madame Hsing replied, "it's all right." And
presently directing two nurses to take her niece over, in the carriage,
in which they had come a while back, Tai-yue thereupon took her leave;
madame Hsing escorting her as far as the ceremonial gate, where she gave
some further directions to all the company of servants. She followed the
curricle with her eyes so long as it remained in sight, and at length
retraced her footsteps.

Tai-yue shortly entered the Jung Mansion, descended from the carriage,
and preceded by all the nurses, she at once proceeded towards the east,
turned a corner, passed through an Entrance Hall, running east and west,
and walked in a southern direction, at the back of the Large Hall. On
the inner side of a ceremonial gate, and at the upper end of a spacious
court, stood a large main building, with five apartments, flanked on
both sides by out-houses (stretching out) like the antlers on the head
of deer; side-gates, resembling passages through a hill, establishing a
thorough communication all round; (a main building) lofty, majestic,
solid and grand, and unlike those in the compound of dowager lady Chia.

Tai-yue readily concluded that this at last was the main inner suite of
apartments. A raised broad road led in a straight line to the large
gate. Upon entering the Hall, and raising her head, she first of all
perceived before her a large tablet with blue ground, upon which figured
nine dragons of reddish gold. The inscription on this tablet consisted
of three characters as large as a peck-measure, and declared that this
was the Hall of Glorious Felicity.

At the end, was a row of characters of minute size, denoting the year,
month and day, upon which His Majesty had been pleased to confer the
tablet upon Chia Yuan, Duke of Jung Kuo. Besides this tablet, were
numberless costly articles bearing the autograph of the Emperor. On the
large black ebony table, engraved with dragons, were placed three
antique blue and green bronze tripods, about three feet in height. On
the wall hung a large picture representing black dragons, such as were
seen in waiting chambers of the Sui dynasty. On one side stood a gold
cup of chased work, while on the other, a crystal casket. On the ground
were placed, in two rows, sixteen chairs, made of hard-grained cedar.

There was also a pair of scrolls consisting of black-wood antithetical
tablets, inlaid with the strokes of words in chased gold. Their burden
was this:

  On the platform shine resplendent pearls like sun or moon,
  And the sheen of the Hall facade gleams like russet sky.

Below, was a row of small characters, denoting that the scroll had been
written by the hand of Mu Shih, a fellow-countryman and old friend of
the family, who, for his meritorious services, had the hereditary title
of Prince of Tung Ngan conferred upon him.

The fact is that madame Wang was also not in the habit of sitting and
resting, in this main apartment, but in three side-rooms on the east, so
that the nurses at once led Tai-yue through the door of the eastern wing.

On a stove-couch, near the window, was spread a foreign red carpet. On
the side of honour, were laid deep red reclining-cushions, with dragons,
with gold cash (for scales), and an oblong brown-coloured
sitting-cushion with gold-cash-spotted dragons. On the two sides, stood
one of a pair of small teapoys of foreign lacquer of peach-blossom
pattern. On the teapoy on the left, were spread out Wen Wang tripods,
spoons, chopsticks and scent-bottles. On the teapoy on the right, were
vases from the Ju Kiln, painted with girls of great beauty, in which
were placed seasonable flowers; (on it were) also teacups, a tea service
and the like articles.

On the floor on the west side of the room, were four chairs in a row,
all of which were covered with antimacassars, embroidered with
silverish-red flowers, while below, at the feet of these chairs, stood
four footstools. On either side, was also one of a pair of high teapoys,
and these teapoys were covered with teacups and flower vases.

The other nick-nacks need not be minutely described.

The old nurses pressed Tai-yue to sit down on the stove-couch; but, on
perceiving near the edge of the couch two embroidered cushions, placed
one opposite the other, she thought of the gradation of seats, and did
not therefore place herself on the couch, but on a chair on the eastern
side of the room; whereupon the waiting maids, in attendance in these
quarters, hastened to serve the tea.

While Tai-yue was sipping her tea, she observed the headgear, dress,
deportment and manners of the several waiting maids, which she really
found so unlike what she had seen in other households. She had hardly
finished her tea, when she noticed a waiting maid approach, dressed in a
red satin jacket, and a waistcoat of blue satin with scollops.

"My lady requests Miss Lin to come over and sit with her," she remarked
as she put on a smile.

The old nurses, upon hearing this message, speedily ushered Tai-yue again
out of this apartment, into the three-roomed small main building by the
eastern porch.

On the stove-couch, situated at the principal part of the room, was
placed, in a transverse position, a low couch-table, at the upper end of
which were laid out, in a heap, books and a tea service. Against the
partition-wall, on the east side, facing the west, was a reclining
pillow, made of blue satin, neither old nor new.

Madame Wang, however, occupied the lower seat, on the west side, on
which was likewise placed a rather shabby blue satin sitting-rug, with a
back-cushion; and upon perceiving Tai-yue come in she urged her at once
to sit on the east side.

Tai-yue concluded, in her mind, that this seat must certainly belong to
Chia Cheng, and espying, next to the couch, a row of three chairs,
covered with antimacassars, strewn with embroidered flowers, somewhat
also the worse for use, Tai-yue sat down on one of these chairs.

But as madame Wang pressed her again and again to sit on the couch,
Tai-yue had at length to take a seat next to her.

"Your uncle," madame Wang explained, "is gone to observe this day as a
fast day, but you'll see him by and bye. There's, however, one thing I
want to talk to you about. Your three female cousins are all, it is
true, everything that is nice; and you will, when later on you come
together for study, or to learn how to do needlework, or whenever, at
any time, you romp and laugh together, find them all most obliging; but
there's one thing that causes me very much concern. I have here one, who
is the very root of retribution, the incarnation of all mischief, one
who is a ne'er-do-well, a prince of malignant spirits in this family. He
is gone to-day to pay his vows in the temple, and is not back yet, but
you will see him in the evening, when you will readily be able to judge
for yourself. One thing you must do, and that is, from this time forth,
not to pay any notice to him. All these cousins of yours don't venture
to bring any taint upon themselves by provoking him."

Tai-yue had in days gone by heard her mother explain that she had a
nephew, born into the world, holding a piece of jade in his mouth, who
was perverse beyond measure, who took no pleasure in his books, and
whose sole great delight was to play the giddy dog in the inner
apartments; that her maternal grandmother, on the other hand, loved him
so fondly that no one ever presumed to call him to account, so that
when, in this instance, she heard madame Wang's advice, she at once felt
certain that it must be this very cousin.

"Isn't it to the cousin born with jade in his mouth, that you are
alluding to, aunt?" she inquired as she returned her smile. "When I was
at home, I remember my mother telling me more than once of this very
cousin, who (she said) was a year older than I, and whose infant name
was Pao-yue. She added that his disposition was really wayward, but that
he treats all his cousins with the utmost consideration. Besides, now
that I have come here, I shall, of course, be always together with my
female cousins, while the boys will have their own court, and separate
quarters; and how ever will there be any cause of bringing any slur upon
myself by provoking him?"

"You don't know the reasons (that prompt me to warn you)," replied
madame Wang laughingly. "He is so unlike all the rest, all because he
has, since his youth up, been doated upon by our old lady! The fact is
that he has been spoilt, through over-indulgence, by being always in the
company of his female cousins! If his female cousins pay no heed to him,
he is, at any rate, somewhat orderly, but the day his cousins say one
word more to him than usual, much trouble forthwith arises, at the
outburst of delight in his heart. That's why I enjoin upon you not to
heed him. From his mouth, at one time, issue sugared words and
mellifluous phrases; and at another, like the heavens devoid of the sun,
he becomes a raving fool; so whatever you do, don't believe all he
says."

Tai-yue was assenting to every bit of advice as it was uttered, when
unexpectedly she beheld a waiting-maid walk in. "Her venerable ladyship
over there," she said, "has sent word about the evening meal."

Madame Wang hastily took Tai-yue by the hand, and emerging by the door of
the back-room, they went eastwards by the verandah at the back. Past the
side gate, was a roadway, running north and south. On the southern side
were a pavilion with three divisions and a Reception Hall with a
colonnade. On the north, stood a large screen wall, painted white;
behind it was a very small building, with a door of half the ordinary
size.

"These are your cousin Feng's rooms," explained madame Wang to Tai-yue,
as she pointed to them smiling. "You'll know in future your way to come
and find her; and if you ever lack anything, mind you mention it to her,
and she'll make it all right."

At the door of this court, were also several youths, who had recently
had the tufts of their hair tied together, who all dropped their hands
against their sides, and stood in a respectful posture. Madame Wang then
led Tai-yue by the hand through a corridor, running east and west, into
what was dowager lady Chia's back-court. Forthwith they entered the door
of the back suite of rooms, where stood, already in attendance, a large
number of servants, who, when they saw madame Wang arrive, set to work
setting the tables and chairs in order.

Chia Chu's wife, nee Li, served the eatables, while Hsi-feng placed the
chopsticks, and madame Wang brought the soup in. Dowager lady Chia was
seated all alone on the divan, in the main part of the apartment, on the
two sides of which stood four vacant chairs.

Hsi-feng at once drew Tai-yue, meaning to make her sit in the foremost
chair on the left side, but Tai-yue steadily and concedingly declined.

"Your aunts and sisters-in-law, standing on the right and left," dowager
lady Chia smilingly explained, "won't have their repast in here, and as
you're a guest, it's but proper that you should take that seat."

Then alone it was that Tai-yue asked for permission to sit down, seating
herself on the chair.

Madame Wang likewise took a seat at old lady Chia's instance; and the
three cousins, Ying Ch'un and the others, having craved for leave to sit
down, at length came forward, and Ying Ch'un took the first chair on the
right, T'an Ch'un the second, and Hsi Ch'un the second on the left.
Waiting maids stood by holding in their hands, flips and finger-bowls
and napkins, while Mrs. Li and lady Feng, the two of them, kept near the
table advising them what to eat, and pressing them to help themselves.

In the outer apartments, the married women and waiting-maids in
attendance, were, it is true, very numerous; but not even so much as the
sound of the cawing of a crow could be heard.

The repast over, each one was presented by a waiting-maid, with tea in a
small tea tray; but the Lin family had all along impressed upon the mind
of their daughter that in order to show due regard to happiness, and to
preserve good health, it was essential, after every meal, to wait a
while, before drinking any tea, so that it should not do any harm to the
intestines. When, therefore, Tai-yue perceived how many habits there were
in this establishment unlike those which prevailed in her home, she too
had no alternative but to conform herself to a certain extent with them.
Upon taking over the cup of tea, servants came once more and presented
finger-bowls for them to rinse their mouths, and Tai-yue also rinsed
hers; and after they had all again finished washing their hands, tea was
eventually served a second time, and this was, at length, the tea that
was intended to be drunk.

"You can all go," observed dowager lady Chia, "and let us alone to have
a chat."

Madame Wang rose as soon as she heard these words, and having made a few
irrelevant remarks, she led the way and left the room along with the two
ladies, Mrs. Li and lady Feng.

Dowager lady Chia, having inquired of Tai-yue what books she was reading,
"I have just begun reading the Four Books," Tai-yue replied. "What books
are my cousins reading?" Tai-yue went on to ask.

"Books, you say!" exclaimed dowager lady Chia; "why all they know are a
few characters, that's all."

The sentence was barely out of her lips, when a continuous sounding of
footsteps was heard outside, and a waiting maid entered and announced
that Pao-yue was coming. Tai-yue was speculating in her mind how it was
that this Pao-yue had turned out such a good-for-nothing fellow, when he
happened to walk in.

He was, in fact, a young man of tender years, wearing on his head, to
hold his hair together, a cap of gold of purplish tinge, inlaid with
precious gems. Parallel with his eyebrows was attached a circlet,
embroidered with gold, and representing two dragons snatching a pearl.
He wore an archery-sleeved deep red jacket, with hundreds of butterflies
worked in gold of two different shades, interspersed with flowers; and
was girded with a sash of variegated silk, with clusters of designs, to
which was attached long tassels; a kind of sash worn in the palace. Over
all, he had a slate-blue fringed coat of Japanese brocaded satin, with
eight bunches of flowers in relief; and wore a pair of light blue satin
white-soled, half-dress court-shoes.

His face was like the full moon at mid-autumn; his complexion, like
morning flowers in spring; the hair along his temples, as if chiselled
with a knife; his eyebrows, as if pencilled with ink; his nose like a
suspended gallbladder (a well-cut and shapely nose); his eyes like
vernal waves; his angry look even resembled a smile; his glance, even
when stern, was full of sentiment.

Round his neck he had a gold dragon necklet with a fringe; also a cord
of variegated silk, to which was attached a piece of beautiful jade.

As soon as Tai-yue became conscious of his presence, she was quite taken
aback. "How very strange!" she was reflecting in her mind; "it would
seem as if I had seen him somewhere or other, for his face appears
extremely familiar to my eyes;" when she noticed Pao-yue face dowager
lady Chia and make his obeisance. "Go and see your mother and then come
back," remarked her venerable ladyship; and at once he turned round and
quitted the room.

On his return, he had already changed his hat and suit. All round his
head, he had a fringe of short hair, plaited into small queues, and
bound with red silk. The queues were gathered up at the crown, and all
the hair, which had been allowed to grow since his birth, was plaited
into a thick queue, which looked as black and as glossy as lacquer.
Between the crown of the head and the extremity of the queue, hung a
string of four large pearls, with pendants of gold, representing the
eight precious things. On his person, he wore a long silvery-red coat,
more or less old, bestrewn with embroidery of flowers. He had still
round his neck the necklet, precious gem, amulet of Recorded Name,
philacteries, and other ornaments. Below were partly visible a fir-cone
coloured brocaded silk pair of trousers, socks spotted with black
designs, with ornamented edges, and a pair of deep red, thick-soled
shoes.

(Got up as he was now,) his face displayed a still whiter appearance, as
if painted, and his eyes as if they were set off with carnation. As he
rolled his eyes, they brimmed with love. When he gave utterance to
speech, he seemed to smile. But the chief natural pleasing feature was
mainly centred in the curve of his eyebrows. The ten thousand and one
fond sentiments, fostered by him during the whole of his existence, were
all amassed in the corner of his eyes.

His outward appearance may have been pleasing to the highest degree, but
yet it was no easy matter to fathom what lay beneath it.

There are a couple of roundelays, composed by a later poet, (after the
excellent rhythm of the) Hsi Chiang Yueh, which depict Pao-yue in a most
adequate manner.

The roundelays run as follows:

  To gloom and passion prone, without a rhyme,
  Inane and madlike was he many a time,
  His outer self, forsooth, fine may have been,
  But one wild, howling waste his mind within:
  Addled his brain that nothing he could see;
  A dunce! to read essays so loth to be!
  Perverse in bearing, in temper wayward;
  For human censure he had no regard.
  When rich, wealth to enjoy he knew not how;
  When poor, to poverty he could not bow.
  Alas! what utter waste of lustrous grace!
  To state, to family what a disgrace!
  Of ne'er-do-wells below he was the prime,
  Unfilial like him none up to this time.
  Ye lads, pampered with sumptuous fare and dress,
  Beware! In this youth's footsteps do not press!

But to proceed with our story.

"You have gone and changed your clothes," observed dowager lady Chia,
"before being introduced to the distant guest. Why don't you yet salute
your cousin?"

Pao-yue had long ago become aware of the presence of a most beautiful
young lady, who, he readily concluded, must be no other than the
daughter of his aunt Lin. He hastened to advance up to her, and make his
bow; and after their introduction, he resumed his seat, whence he
minutely scrutinised her features, (which he thought) so unlike those of
all other girls.

Her two arched eyebrows, thick as clustered smoke, bore a certain not
very pronounced frowning wrinkle. She had a pair of eyes, which
possessed a cheerful, and yet one would say, a sad expression,
overflowing with sentiment. Her face showed the prints of sorrow stamped
on her two dimpled cheeks. She was beautiful, but her whole frame was
the prey of a hereditary disease. The tears in her eyes glistened like
small specks. Her balmy breath was so gentle. She was as demure as a
lovely flower reflected in the water. Her gait resembled a frail willow,
agitated by the wind. Her heart, compared with that of Pi Kan, had one
more aperture of intelligence; while her ailment exceeded (in intensity)
by three degrees the ailment of Hsi-Tzu.

Pao-yue, having concluded his scrutiny of her, put on a smile and said,
"This cousin I have already seen in days gone by."

"There you are again with your nonsense," exclaimed lady Chia,
sneeringly; "how could you have seen her before?"

"Though I may not have seen her, ere this," observed Pao-yue with a
smirk, "yet when I look at her face, it seems so familiar, and to my
mind, it would appear as if we had been old acquaintances; just as if,
in fact, we were now meeting after a long separation."

"That will do! that will do!" remarked dowager lady Chia; "such being
the case, you will be the more intimate."

Pao-yue, thereupon, went up to Tai-yue, and taking a seat next to her,
continued to look at her again with all intentness for a good long
while.

"Have you read any books, cousin?" he asked.

"I haven't as yet," replied Tai-yue, "read any books, as I have only been
to school for a year; all I know are simply a few characters."

"What is your worthy name, cousin?" Pao-yue went on to ask; whereupon
Tai-yue speedily told him her name.

"Your style?" inquired Pao-yue; to which question Tai-yue replied, "I have
no style."

"I'll give you a style," suggested Pao-yue smilingly; "won't the double
style 'P'in P'in,' 'knitting brows,' do very well?"

"From what part of the standard books does that come?" T'an Ch'un
hastily interposed.

"It is stated in the Thorough Research into the state of Creation from
remote ages to the present day," Pao-yue went on to explain, "that, in
the western quarter, there exists a stone, called Tai, (black,) which
can be used, in lieu of ink, to blacken the eyebrows with. Besides the
eyebrows of this cousin taper in a way, as if they were contracted, so
that the selection of these two characters is most appropriate, isn't
it?"

"This is just another plagiarism, I fear," observed T'an Ch'un, with an
ironic smirk.

"Exclusive of the Four Books," Pao-yue remarked smilingly, "the majority
of works are plagiarised; and is it only I, perchance, who plagiarise?
Have you got any jade or not?" he went on to inquire, addressing Tai-yue,
(to the discomfiture) of all who could not make out what he meant.

"It's because he has a jade himself," Tai-yue forthwith reasoned within
her mind, "that he asks me whether I have one or not.--No; I haven't
one," she replied. "That jade of yours is besides a rare object, and how
could every one have one?"

As soon as Pao-yue heard this remark, he at once burst out in a fit of
his raving complaint, and unclasping the gem, he dashed it disdainfully
on the floor. "Rare object, indeed!" he shouted, as he heaped invective
on it; "it has no idea how to discriminate the excellent from the mean,
among human beings; and do tell me, has it any perception or not? I too
can do without this rubbish!"

All those, who stood below, were startled; and in a body they pressed
forward, vying with each other as to who should pick up the gem.

Dowager lady Chia was so distressed that she clasped Pao-yue in her
embrace. "You child of wrath," she exclaimed. "When you get into a
passion, it's easy enough for you to beat and abuse people; but what
makes you fling away that stem of life?"

Pao-yue's face was covered with the traces of tears. "All my cousins
here, senior as well as junior," he rejoined, as he sobbed, "have no
gem, and if it's only I to have one, there's no fun in it, I maintain!
and now comes this angelic sort of cousin, and she too has none, so that
it's clear enough that it is no profitable thing."

Dowager lady Chia hastened to coax him. "This cousin of yours," she
explained, "would, under former circumstances, have come here with a
jade; and it's because your aunt felt unable, as she lay on her
death-bed, to reconcile herself to the separation from your cousin, that
in the absence of any remedy, she forthwith took the gem belonging to
her (daughter), along with her (in the grave); so that, in the first
place, by the fulfilment of the rites of burying the living with the
dead might be accomplished the filial piety of your cousin; and in the
second place, that the spirit of your aunt might also, for the time
being, use it to gratify the wish of gazing on your cousin. That's why
she simply told you that she had no jade; for she couldn't very well
have had any desire to give vent to self-praise. Now, how can you ever
compare yourself with her? and don't you yet carefully and circumspectly
put it on? Mind, your mother may come to know what you have done!"

As she uttered these words, she speedily took the jade over from the
hand of the waiting-maid, and she herself fastened it on for him.

When Pao-yue heard this explanation, he indulged in reflection, but could
not even then advance any further arguments.

A nurse came at the moment and inquired about Tai-yue's quarters, and
dowager lady Chia at once added, "Shift Pao-yue along with me, into the
warm room of my suite of apartments, and put your mistress, Miss Lin,
temporarily in the green gauze house; and when the rest of the winter is
over, and repairs are taken in hand in spring in their rooms, an
additional wing can be put up for her to take up her quarters in."

"My dear ancestor," ventured Pao-yue; "the bed I occupy outside the green
gauze house is very comfortable; and what need is there again for me to
leave it and come and disturb your old ladyship's peace and quiet?"

"Well, all right," observed dowager lady Chia, after some consideration;
"but let each one of you have a nurse, as well as a waiting-maid to
attend on you; the other servants can remain in the outside rooms and
keep night watch and be ready to answer any call."

At an early hour, besides, Hsi-feng had sent a servant round with a grey
flowered curtain, embroidered coverlets and satin quilts and other such
articles.

Tai-yue had brought along with her only two servants; the one was her own
nurse, dame Wang, and the other was a young waiting-maid of sixteen,
whose name was called Hsueeh Yen. Dowager lady Chia, perceiving that
Hsueeh Yen was too youthful and quite a child in her manner, while nurse
Wang was, on the other hand, too aged, conjectured that Tai-yue would, in
all her wants, not have things as she liked, so she detached two
waiting-maids, who were her own personal attendants, named Tzu Chuean and
Ying Ko, and attached them to Tai-yue's service. Just as had Ying Ch'un
and the other girls, each one of whom had besides the wet nurses of
their youth, four other nurses to advise and direct them, and exclusive
of two personal maids to look after their dress and toilette, four or
five additional young maids to do the washing and sweeping of the rooms
and the running about backwards and forwards on errands.

Nurse Wang, Tzu Chuean and other girls entered at once upon their
attendance on Tai-yue in the green gauze rooms, while Pao-yue's wet-nurse,
dame Li, together with an elderly waiting-maid, called Hsi Jen, were on
duty in the room with the large bed.

This Hsi Jen had also been, originally, one of dowager lady Chia's
servant-girls. Her name was in days gone by, Chen Chu. As her venerable
ladyship, in her tender love for Pao-yue, had feared that Pao-yue's
servant girls were not equal to their duties, she readily handed her to
Pao-yue, as she had hitherto had experience of how sincere and
considerate she was at heart.

Pao-yue, knowing that her surname was at one time Hua, and having once
seen in some verses of an ancient poet, the line "the fragrance of
flowers wafts itself into man," lost no time in explaining the fact to
dowager lady Chia, who at once changed her name into Hsi Jen.

This Hsi Jen had several simple traits. While in attendance upon dowager
lady Chia, in her heart and her eyes there was no one but her venerable
ladyship, and her alone; and now in her attendance upon Pao-yue, her
heart and her eyes were again full of Pao-yue, and him alone. But as
Pao-yue was of a perverse temperament and did not heed her repeated
injunctions, she felt at heart exceedingly grieved.

At night, after nurse Li had fallen asleep, seeing that in the inner
chambers, Tai-yue, Ying Ko and the others had not as yet retired to rest,
she disrobed herself, and with gentle step walked in.

"How is it, miss," she inquired smiling, "that you have not turned in as
yet?"

Tai-yue at once put on a smile. "Sit down, sister," she rejoined,
pressing her to take a seat. Hsi Jen sat on the edge of the bed.

"Miss Lin," interposed Ying Ko smirkingly, "has been here in an awful
state of mind! She has cried so to herself, that her eyes were flooded,
as soon as she dried her tears. 'It's only to-day that I've come,' she
said, 'and I've already been the cause of the outbreak of your young
master's failing. Now had he broken that jade, as he hurled it on the
ground, wouldn't it have been my fault? Hence it was that she was so
wounded at heart, that I had all the trouble in the world, before I
could appease her."

"Desist at once, Miss! Don't go on like this," Hsi Jen advised her;
"there will, I fear, in the future, happen things far more strange and
ridiculous than this; and if you allow yourself to be wounded and
affected to such a degree by a conduct such as his, you will, I
apprehend, suffer endless wounds and anguish; so be quick and dispel
this over-sensitive nature!"

"What you sisters advise me," replied Tai-yue, "I shall bear in mind, and
it will be all right."

They had another chat, which lasted for some time, before they at length
retired to rest for the night.

The next day, (she and her cousins) got up at an early hour and went
over to pay their respects to dowager lady Chia, after which upon coming
to madame Wang's apartments, they happened to find madame Wang and
Hsi-feng together, opening the letters which had arrived from Chin Ling.
There were also in the room two married women, who had been sent from
madame Wang's elder brother's wife's house to deliver a message.

Tai-yue was, it is true, not aware of what was up, but T'an Ch'un and the
others knew that they were discussing the son of her mother's sister,
married in the Hsueeh family, in the city of Chin Ling, a cousin of
theirs, Hsueeh P'an, who relying upon his wealth and influence had, by
assaulting a man, committed homicide, and who was now to be tried in the
court of the Ying T'ien Prefecture.

Her maternal uncle, Wang Tzu-t'eng, had now, on the receipt of the
tidings, despatched messengers to bring over the news to the Chia
family. But the next chapter will explain what was the ultimate issue of
the wish entertained in this mansion to send for the Hsueeh family to
come to the capital.




CHAPTER IV.

  An ill-fated girl happens to meet an ill-fated young man.
  The Hu Lu Bonze adjudicates the Hu Lu case.


Tai-yue, for we shall now return to our story, having come, along with
her cousin to madame Wang's apartments, found madame Wang discussing
certain domestic occurrences with the messengers, who had arrived from
her elder brother's wife's home, and conversing also about the case of
homicide, in which the family of her mother's sister had become
involved, and other such relevant topics. Perceiving how pressing and
perplexing were the matters in which madame Wang was engaged, the young
ladies promptly left her apartments, and came over to the rooms of their
widow sister-in-law, Mrs. Li.

This Mrs. Li had originally been the spouse of Chia Chu. Although Chu
had died at an early age, he had the good fortune of leaving behind him
a son, to whom the name of Chia Lan was given. He was, at this period,
just in his fifth year, and had already entered school, and applied
himself to books.

This Mrs. Li was also the daughter of an official of note in Chin Ling.
Her father's name was Li Shou-chung, who had, at one time, been Imperial
Libationer. Among his kindred, men as well as women had all devoted
themselves to poetry and letters; but ever since Li Shou-chung continued
the line of succession, he readily asserted that the absence of literary
attainments in his daughter was indeed a virtue, so that it soon came
about that she did not apply herself in real earnest to learning; with
the result that all she studied were some parts of the "Four Books for
women," and the "Memoirs of excellent women," that all she read did not
extend beyond a limited number of characters, and that all she committed
to memory were the examples of these few worthy female characters of
dynasties of yore; while she attached special importance to spinning and
female handiwork. To this reason is to be assigned the name selected for
her, of Li Wan (Li, the weaver), and the style of Kung Ts'ai (Palace
Sempstress).

Hence it was that, though this Li Wan still continued, after the loss of
her mate, while she was as yet in the spring of her life, to live amidst
affluence and luxury, she nevertheless resembled in every respect a
block of rotten wood or dead ashes. She had no inclination whatsoever to
inquire after anything or to listen to anything; while her sole and
exclusive thought was to wait upon her relatives and educate her son;
and, in addition to this, to teach her young sisters-in-law to do
needlework and to read aloud.

Tai-yue was, it is true, at this period living as a guest in the Chia
mansion, where she certainly had the several young ladies to associate
with her, but, outside her aged father, (she thought) there was really
no need for her to extend affection to any of the rest.

But we will now speak of Chia Yue-ts'un. Having obtained the appointment
of Prefect of Ying T'ien, he had no sooner arrived at his post than a
charge of manslaughter was laid before his court. This had arisen from
some rivalry between two parties in the purchase of a slave-girl, either
of whom would not yield his right; with the result that a serious
assault occurred, which ended in homicide.

Yue-ts'un had, with all promptitude, the servants of the plaintiffs
brought before him, and subjected them to an examination.

"The victim of the assault," the plaintiffs deposed, "was your servants'
master. Having on a certain day, purchased a servant-girl, she
unexpectedly turned out to be a girl who had been carried away and sold
by a kidnapper. This kidnapper had, first of all, got hold of our
family's money, and our master had given out that he would on the third
day, which was a propitious day, take her over into the house, but
this kidnapper stealthily sold her over again to the Hsueeh family. When
we came to know of this, we went in search of the seller to lay hold of
him, and bring back the girl by force. But the Hsueeh party has been all
along _the_ bully of Chin Ling, full of confidence in his wealth,
full of presumption on account of his prestige; and his arrogant menials
in a body seized our master and beat him to death. The murderous master
and his crew have all long ago made good their escape, leaving no trace
behind them, while there only remain several parties not concerned in
the affair. Your servants have for a whole year lodged complaints, but
there has been no one to do our cause justice, and we therefore implore
your Lordship to have the bloodstained criminals arrested, and thus
conduce to the maintenance of humanity and benevolence; and the living,
as well as the dead, will feel boundless gratitude for this heavenly
bounty."

When Yue-ts'un heard their appeal, he flew into a fiery rage. "What!" he
exclaimed. "How could a case of such gravity have taken place as the
murder of a man, and the culprits have been allowed to run away
scot-free, without being arrested? Issue warrants, and despatch
constables to at once lay hold of the relatives of the bloodstained
criminals and bring them to be examined by means of torture."

Thereupon he espied a Retainer, who was standing by the judgment-table,
wink at him, signifying that he should not issue the warrants. Yue-t'sun
gave way to secret suspicion, and felt compelled to desist.

Withdrawing from the Court-room, he retired into a private chamber, from
whence he dismissed his followers, only keeping this single Retainer to
wait upon him.

The Retainer speedily advanced and paid his obeisance. "Your worship,"
he said smiling, "has persistently been rising in official honours, and
increasing in wealth so that, in the course of about eight or nine
years, you have forgotten me."

"Your face is, however, extremely familiar," observed Yue-ts'un, "but I
cannot, for the moment, recall who you are."

"Honourable people forget many things," remarked the Retainer, as he
smiled. "What! Have you even forgotten the place where you started in
life? and do you not remember what occurred, in years gone by, in the Hu
Lu Temple?"

Yue-ts'un was filled with extreme astonishment; and past events then
began to dawn upon him.

The fact is that this Retainer had been at one time a young priest in
the Hu Lu temple; but as, after its destruction by fire, he had no place
to rest his frame, he remembered how light and easy was, after all, this
kind of occupation, and being unable to reconcile himself to the
solitude and quiet of a temple, he accordingly availed himself of his
years, which were as yet few, to let his hair grow, and become a
retainer.

Yue-ts'un had had no idea that it was he. Hastily taking his hand in his,
he smilingly observed, "You are, indeed, an old acquaintance!" and then
pressed him to take a seat, so as to have a chat with more ease, but the
Retainer would not presume to sit down.

"Friendships," Yue-ts'un remarked, putting on a smiling expression,
"contracted in poor circumstances should not be forgotten! This is a
private room; so that if you sat down, what would it matter?"

The Retainer thereupon craved permission to take a seat, and sat down
gingerly, all awry.

"Why did you, a short while back," Yue-ts'un inquired, "not allow me to
issue the warrants?"

"Your illustrious office," replied the Retainer, "has brought your
worship here, and is it likely you have not transcribed some philactery
of your post in this province!"

"What is an office-philactery?" asked Yue-ts'un with alacrity.

"Now-a-days," explained the Retainer, "those who become local officers
provide themselves invariably with a secret list, in which are entered
the names and surnames of the most influential and affluent gentry of
note in the province. This is in vogue in every province. Should
inadvertently, at any moment, one give umbrage to persons of this
status, why, not only office, but I fear even one's life, it would be
difficult to preserve. That's why these lists are called
office-philacteries. This Hsueeh family, just a while back spoken of, how
could your worship presume to provoke? This case in question affords no
difficulties whatever in the way of a settlement; but the prefects, who
have held office before you, have all, by doing violence to the feelings
and good name of these people, come to the end they did."

As he uttered these words, he produced, from inside a purse which he had
handy, a transcribed office-philactery, which he handed over to
Yue-ts'un; who upon perusal, found it full of trite and unpolished
expressions of public opinion, with regard to the leading clans and
notable official families in that particular district. They ran as
follows:

The "Chia" family is not "chia," a myth; white jade form the Halls; gold
compose their horses! The "A Fang" Palace is three hundred li in extent,
but is no fit residence for a "Shih" of Chin Ling. The eastern seas lack
white jade beds, and the "Lung Wang," king of the Dragons, has come to
ask for one of the Chin Ling Wang, (Mr. Wang of Chin Ling.) In a
plenteous year, snow, (Hsueeh,) is very plentiful; their pearls and gems
are like sand, their gold like iron.

Scarcely had Yue-ts'un done reading, when suddenly was heard the
announcement, communicated by the beating of a gong, that Mr. Wang had
come to pay his respects.

Yue-ts'un hastily adjusted his official clothes and hat, and went out of
the room to greet and receive the visitor. Returning after a short while
he proceeded to question the Retainer (about what he had been perusing.)

"These four families," explained the Retainer, "are all interlaced by
ties of relationship, so that if you offend one, you offend all; if you
honour one, you honour all. For support and protection, they all have
those to take care of their interests! Now this Hsueeh, who is charged
with homicide, is indeed the Hsueeh implied by 'in a plenteous year,
(Hsueeh,) snow, is very plentiful.' In fact, not only has he these three
families to rely upon, but his (father's) old friends, and his own
relatives and friends are both to be found in the capital, as well as
abroad in the provinces; and they are, what is more, not few in number.
Who is it then that your Worship purposes having arrested?"

When Yue-ts'un had heard these remarks, he forthwith put on a smile and
inquired of the Retainer, "If what you say be true, how is then this
lawsuit to be settled? Are you also perchance well aware of the place of
retreat of this homicide?"

"I don't deceive your Worship," the Retainer ventured smiling, "when I
say that not only do I know the hiding-place of this homicide, but that
I also am acquainted with the man who kidnapped and sold the girl; I
likewise knew full well the poor devil and buyer, now deceased. But
wait, and I'll tell your worship all, with full details. This person,
who succumbed to the assault, was the son of a minor gentry. His name
was Feng Yuean. His father and mother are both deceased, and he has
likewise no brothers. He looked after some scanty property in order to
eke out a living. His age was eighteen or nineteen; and he had a strong
penchant for men's, and not much for women's society. But this was too
the retribution (for sins committed) in a previous existence! for
coming, by a strange coincidence, in the way of this kidnapper, who was
selling the maid, he straightway at a glance fell in love with this
girl, and made up his mind to purchase her and make her his second wife;
entering an oath not to associate with any male friends, nor even to
marry another girl. And so much in earnest was he in this matter that he
had to wait until after the third day before she could enter his
household (so as to make the necessary preparations for the marriage).
But who would have foreseen the issue? This kidnapper quietly disposed
of her again by sale to the Hsueeh family; his intention being to pocket
the price-money from both parties, and effect his escape. Contrary to
his calculations, he couldn't after all run away in time, and the two
buyers laid hold of him and beat him, till he was half dead; but neither
of them would take his coin back, each insisting upon the possession of
the girl. But do you think that young gentleman, Mr. Hsueeh, would yield
his claim to her person? Why, he at once summoned his servants and bade
them have recourse to force; and, taking this young man Feng, they
assailed him till they made mincemeat of him. He was then carried back
to his home, where he finally died after the expiry of three days. This
young Mr. Hsueeh had previously chosen a day, on which he meant to set
out for the capital, and though he had beaten the young man Feng to
death, and carried off the girl, he nevertheless behaved in the manner
of a man who had had no concern in the affair. And all he gave his mind
to was to take his family and go along on his way; but not in any wise
in order to evade (the consequences) of this (occurrence). This case of
homicide, (he looked upon) as a most trivial and insignificant matter,
which, (he thought), his brother and servants, who were on the spot,
would be enough to settle. But, however, enough of this person. Now does
your worship know who this girl is who was sold?"

"How could I possibly know?" answered Yue-ts'un.

"And yet," remarked the Retainer, as he laughed coldly, "this is a
person to whom you are indebted for great obligations; for she is no one
else than the daughter of Mr. Chen, who lived next door to the Hu Lu
temple. Her infant name is 'Ying Lien.'"

"What! is it really she?" exclaimed Yue-ts'un full of surprise. "I heard
that she had been kidnapped, ever since she was five years old; but has
she only been sold recently?"

"Kidnappers of this kind," continued the Retainer, "only abduct infant
girls, whom they bring up till they reach the age of twelve or thirteen,
when they take them into strange districts and dispose of them through
their agents. In days gone by, we used daily to coax this girl, Ying
Lien, to romp with us, so that we got to be exceedingly friendly. Hence
it is that though, with the lapse of seven or eight years, her mien has
assumed a more surpassingly lovely appearance, her general features
have, on the other hand, undergone no change; and this is why I can
recognise her. Besides, in the centre of her two eyebrows, she had a
spot, of the size of a grain of rice, of carnation colour, which she has
had ever since she was born into the world. This kidnapper, it also
happened, rented my house to live in; and on a certain day, on which the
kidnapper was not at home, I even set her a few questions. She said,
'that the kidnapper had so beaten her, that she felt intimidated, and
couldn't on any account, venture to speak out; simply averring that the
kidnapper was her own father, and that, as he had no funds to repay his
debts, he had consequently disposed of her by sale!' I tried time after
time to induce her to answer me, but she again gave way to tears and
added no more than: 'I don't really remember anything of my youth.' Of
this, anyhow, there can be no doubt; on a certain day the young man Feng
and the kidnapper met, said the money was paid down; but as the
kidnapper happened to be intoxicated, Ying Lien exclaimed, as she
sighed: 'My punishment has this day been consummated!' Later on again,
when she heard that young Feng would, after three days, have her taken
over to his house, she once more underwent a change and put on such a
sorrowful look that, unable to brook the sight of it, I waited till the
kidnapper went out, when I again told my wife to go and cheer her by
representing to her that this Mr. Feng's fixed purpose to wait for a
propitious day, on which to come and take her over, was ample proof that
he would not look upon her as a servant-girl. 'Furthermore,' (explained
my wife to her), 'he is a sort of person exceedingly given to fast
habits, and has at home ample means to live upon, so that if, besides,
with his extreme aversion to women, he actually purchases you now, at a
fancy price, you should be able to guess the issue, without any
explanation. You have to bear suspense only for two or three days, and
what need is there to be sorrowful and dejected?' After these
assurances, she became somewhat composed, flattering herself that she
would from henceforth have a home of her own.

"But who would believe that the world is but full of disappointments! On
the succeeding day, it came about that the kidnapper again sold her to
the Hsueeh family! Had he disposed of her to any other party, no harm
would anyhow have resulted; but this young gentleman Hsueeh, who is
nicknamed by all, 'the Foolish and overbearing Prince,' is the most
perverse and passionate being in the whole world. What is more, he
throws money away as if it were dust. The day on which he gave the
thrashing with blows like falling leaves and flowing water, he dragged
(_lit_. pull alive, drag dead) Ying Lien away more dead than alive,
by sheer force, and no one, even up to this date, is aware whether she
be among the dead or the living. This young Feng had a spell of empty
happiness; for (not only) was his wish not fulfilled, but on the
contrary he spent money and lost his life; and was not this a lamentable
case?"

When Yue-ts'un heard this account he also heaved a sigh. "This was
indeed," he observed, "a retribution in store for them! Their encounter
was likewise not accidental; for had it been, how was it that this Feng
Yuean took a fancy to Ying Lien?

"This Ying Lien had, during all these years, to endure much harsh
treatment from the hands of the kidnapper, and had, at length, obtained
the means of escape; and being besides full of warm feeling, had he
actually made her his wife, and had they come together, the event would
certainly have been happy; but, as luck would have it, there occurred
again this contretemps.

"This Hsueeh is, it is true, more laden with riches and honours than Feng
was, but when we bear in mind what kind of man he is he certainly, with
his large bevy of handmaids, and his licentious and inordinate habits,
cannot ever be held equal to Feng Yuean, who had set his heart upon one
person! This may appositely be termed a fantastic sentimental destiny,
which, by a strange coincidence, befell a couple consisting of an
ill-fated young fellow and girl! But why discuss third parties? The only
thing now is how to decide this case, so as to put things right."

"Your worship," remarked the Retainer smiling, "displayed, in years gone
by, such great intelligence and decision, and how is it that today you,
on the contrary, become a person without any resources! Your servant has
heard that the promotion of your worship to fill up this office is due
to the exertions of the Chia and Wang families; and as this Hsueeh P'an
is a relative of the Chia mansion, why doesn't your worship take your
craft along with the stream, and bring, by the performance of a
kindness, this case to an issue, so that you may again in days to come,
be able to go and face the two Dukes Chia and Wang?"

"What you suggest," replied Yue-ts'un, "is, of course, right enough; but
this case involves a human life, and honoured as I have been, by His
Majesty the Emperor, by a restoration to office, and selection to an
appointment, how can I at the very moment, when I may strain all my
energies to show my gratitude, by reason of a private consideration, set
the laws at nought? This is a thing which I really haven't the courage
to do."

"What your worship says is naturally right and proper," remarked the
Retainer at these words, smiling sarcastically, "but at the present
stage of the world, such things cannot be done. Haven't you heard the
saying of a man of old to the effect that great men take action suitable
to the times. 'He who presses,' he adds, 'towards what is auspicious and
avoids what is inauspicious is a perfect man.' From what your worship
says, not only you couldn't, by any display of zeal, repay your
obligation to His Majesty, but, what is more, your own life you will
find it difficult to preserve. There are still three more considerations
necessary to insure a safe settlement."

Yue-ts'un drooped his head for a considerable time.

"What is there in your idea to be done?" he at length inquired.

"Your servant," responded the Retainer, "has already devised a most
excellent plan. It's this: To-morrow, when your Lordship sits in court,
you should, merely for form's sake, make much ado, by despatching
letters and issuing warrants for the arrest of the culprits. The
murderer will naturally not be forthcoming; and as the plaintiffs will
be strong in their displeasure, you will of course have some members of
the clan of the Hsueeh family, together with a few servants and others,
taken into custody, and examined under torture, when your servant will
be behind the scenes to bring matters to a settlement, by bidding them
report that the victim had succumbed to a sudden ailment, and by urging
the whole number of the kindred, as well as the headmen of the place, to
hand in a declaration to that effect. Your Worship can aver that you
understand perfectly how to write charms in dust, and conjure the
spirit; having had an altar, covered with dust, placed in the court, you
should bid the military and people to come and look on to their heart's
content. Your Worship can give out that the divining spirit has
declared: 'that the deceased, Feng Yuean, and Hsueeh P'an had been enemies
in a former life, that having now met in the narrow road, their
destinies were consummated; that Hsueeh P'an has, by this time,
contracted some indescribable disease and perished from the effects of
the persecution of the spirit of Feng.' That as the calamity had
originated entirely from the action of the kidnapper, exclusive of
dealing with the kidnapper according to law, the rest need not be
interfered with, and so on. Your servant will be in the background to
speak to the kidnapper and urge him to make a full confession; and when
people find that the response of the divining spirit harmonizes with the
statements of the kidnapper, they will, as a matter of course, entertain
no suspicion.

"The Hsueeh family have plenty of money, so that if your Worship
adjudicates that they should pay five hundred, they can afford it, or
one thousand will also be within their means; and this sum can be handed
to the Feng family to meet the outlay of burning incense and burial
expenses. The Feng family are, besides, people of not much consequence,
and (the fuss made by them) being simply for money, they too will, when
they have got the cash in hand, have nothing more to say. But may it
please your worship to consider carefully this plan and see what you
think of it?"

"It isn't a safe course! It isn't a safe course!" Yue-ts'un observed as
he smiled. "Let me further think and deliberate; and possibly by
succeeding in suppressing public criticism, the matter might also be
settled."

These two closed their consultation by a fixed determination, and the
next day, when he sat in judgment, he marked off a whole company of the
plaintiffs as well as of the accused, as were mentioned by name, and had
them brought before him. Yue-ts'un examined them with additional
minuteness, and discovered in point of fact, that the inmates of the
Feng family were extremely few, that they merely relied upon this charge
with the idea of obtaining some compensation for joss-sticks and
burials; and that the Hsueeh family, presuming on their prestige and
confident of patronage, had been obstinate in the refusal to make any
mutual concession, with the result that confusion had supervened, and
that no decision had been arrived at.

Following readily the bent of his feelings, Yue-ts'un disregarded the
laws, and adjudicated this suit in a random way; and as the Feng family
came in for a considerable sum, with which to meet the expense for
incense and the funeral, they had, after all, not very much to say (in
the way of objections.)

With all despatch, Yue-ts'un wrote and forwarded two letters, one to Chia
Cheng, and the other to Wang Tzu-t'eng, at that time commander-in-chief
of a Metropolitan Division, simply informing them: that the case, in
which their worthy nephew was concerned, had come to a close, and that
there was no need for them to give way to any extreme solicitude.

This case had been settled through the exclusive action of the young
priest of the Hu Lu temple, now an official Retainer; and Yue-ts'un,
apprehending, on the other hand, lest he might in the presence of
others, divulge the circumstances connected with the days gone by, when
he was in a state of penury, naturally felt very unhappy in his mind.
But at a later period, he succeeded, by ultimately finding in him some
shortcoming, and deporting him to a far-away place, in setting his fears
at rest.

But we will put Yue-ts'un on one side, and refer to the young man Hsueeh,
who purchased Ying Lien, and assaulted Feng Yuan to death.

He too was a native of Chin Ling and belonged to a family literary
during successive generations; but this young Hsueeh had recently, when
of tender age, lost his father, and his widowed mother out of pity for
his being the only male issue and a fatherless child, could not help
doating on him and indulging him to such a degree, that when he, in
course of time, grew up to years of manhood, he was good for nothing.

In their home, furthermore, was the wealth of a millionaire, and they
were, at this time, in receipt of an income from His Majesty's privy
purse, for the purvey of various articles.

This young Hsueeh went at school under the name of P'an. His style was
Wen Ch'i. His natural habits were extravagant; his language haughty and
supercilious. He had, of course, also been to school, but all he knew
was a limited number of characters, and those not well. The whole day
long, his sole delight was in cock-fighting and horse-racing, rambling
over hills and doing the sights.

Though a Purveyor, by Imperial appointment, he had not the least idea of
anything relating to matters of business or of the world. All he was
good for was: to take advantage of the friendships enjoyed by his
grandfather in days of old, to present himself at the Board of Revenue
to perfunctorily sign his name and to draw the allowance and rations;
while the rest of his affairs he, needless to say, left his partners and
old servants of the family to manage for him.

His widowed mother, a Miss Wang, was the youngest sister of Wang
Tzu-t'eng, whose present office was that of Commander-in-Chief of a
Metropolitan Division; and was, with Madame Wang, the spouse of Chia
Cheng, of the Jung Kuo Mansion, sisters born of one mother. She was, in
this year, more or less forty years of age and had only one son: this
Hsueeh P'an.

She also had a daughter, who was two years younger than Hsueeh P'an, and
whose infant name was Pao Ch'ai. She was beautiful in appearance, and
elegant and refined in deportment. In days gone by, when her father
lived, he was extremely fond of this girl, and had her read books and
study characters, so that, as compared with her brother, she was
actually a hundred times his superior. Having become aware, ever since
her father's death, that her brother could not appease the anguish of
her mother's heart, she at once dispelled all thoughts of books, and
gave her sole mind to needlework, to the menage and other such concerns,
so as to be able to participate in her mother's sorrow, and to bear the
fatigue in lieu of her.

As of late the Emperor on the Throne held learning and propriety in high
esteem, His Majesty called together and singled out talent and ability,
upon which he deigned to display exceptional grace and favour. Besides
the number called forth from private life and chosen as Imperial
secondary wives, the daughters of families of hereditary official status
and renown were without exception, reported by name to the authorities,
and communicated to the Board, in anticipation of the selection for
maids in waiting to the Imperial Princesses and daughters of Imperial
Princes in their studies, and for filling up the offices of persons of
eminence, to urge them to become excellent.

Ever since the death of Hsueeh P'an's father, the various assistants,
managers and partners, and other employes in the respective provinces,
perceiving how youthful Hsueeh P'an was in years, and how much he lacked
worldly experience, readily availed themselves of the time to begin
swindling and defrauding. The business, carried on in various different
places in the capital, gradually also began to fall off and to show a
deficit.

Hsueeh P'an had all along heard that the capital was the _one_ place
for gaieties, and was just entertaining the idea of going on a visit,
when he eagerly jumped at the opportunity (that presented itself,) first
of all to escort his sister, who was going to wait for the selection, in
the second place to see his relatives, and in the third to enter
personally the capital, (professedly) to settle up long-standing
accounts, and to make arrangements for new outlays, but, in reality,
with the sole purpose of seeing the life and splendour of the
metropolis.

He therefore, had, at an early period, got ready his baggage and small
luggage, as well as the presents for relatives and friends, things of
every description of local production, presents in acknowledgment of
favours received, and other such effects, and he was about to choose a
day to start on his journey when unexpectedly he came in the way of the
kidnapper who offered Ying Lien for sale. As soon as Hsueeh P'an saw how
_distinguee_ Ying Lien was in her appearance, he formed the
resolution of buying her; and when he encountered Feng Yuean, come with
the object of depriving him of her, he in the assurance of superiority,
called his sturdy menials together, who set upon Feng Yuean and beat him
to death. Forthwith collecting all the affairs of the household, and
entrusting them one by one to the charge of some members of the clan and
several elderly servants of the family, he promptly took his mother,
sister and others and after all started on his distant journey, while
the charge of homicide he, however, treated as child's play, flattering
himself that if he spent a few filthy pieces of money, there was no
doubt as to its settlement.

He had been on his journey how many days, he had not reckoned, when, on
a certain day, as they were about to enter the capital, he furthermore
heard that his maternal uncle, Wang Tzu-t'eng, had been raised to the
rank of Supreme Governor of nine provinces, and had been honoured with
an Imperial command to leave the capital and inspect the frontiers.

Hsueeh P'an was at heart secretly elated. "I was just lamenting," he
thought, "that on my visit to the capital, I would have my maternal
uncle to exercise control over me, and that I wouldn't be able to gambol
and frisk to my heart's content, but now that he is leaving the capital,
on promotion, it's evident that Heaven accomplishes man's wishes."

As he consequently held consultation with his mother; "Though we have,"
he argued, "several houses of our own in the capital, yet for these last
ten years or so, there has been no one to live in them, and the people
charged with the looking after them must unavoidably have stealthily
rented them to some one or other. It's therefore needful to let servants
go ahead to sweep and get the place in proper order, before we can very
well go ourselves."

"What need is there to go to such trouble?" retorted his mother; "the
main object of our present visit to the capital is first of all to pay
our respects to our relatives and friends; and it is, either at your
elder uncle's, my brother's place, or at your other uncle's, my sister's
husband's home, both of which families' houses are extremely spacious,
that we can put up provisionally, and by and bye, at our ease, we can
send servants to make our house tidy. Now won't this be a considerable
saving of trouble?"

"My uncle, your brother," suggested Hsueeh P'an, "has just been raised to
an appointment in an outside province, so that, of course, in his house,
things must be topsy-turvey, on account of his departure; and should we
betake ourselves, like a hive of bees and a long trail, to him for
shelter; won't we appear very inconsiderate?"

"Your uncle," remarked his mother, "is, it is true, going on promotion,
but there's besides the house of your aunt, my sister. What is more,
during these last few years from both your uncle's and aunt's have, time
after time, been sent messages, and letters forwarded, asking us to come
over; and now that we've come, is it likely, though your uncle is busy
with his preparations to start on his journey, that your aunt of the
Chia family won't do all she can to press us to stay? Besides, were we
to have our house got ready in a scramble, won't it make people think it
strange? I however know your idea very well that were we kept to stay at
your uncle's and aunt's, you won't escape being under strict restraint,
unlike what would be the case were we to live in our own house, as you
would be free then to act as you please! Such being the case, go, on
your own account, and choose some place to take up your quarters in,
while I myself, who have been separated from your aunt and cousins for
these several years, would however like to stay with them for a few
days; and I'll go along with your sister and look up your aunt at her
home. What do you say; will this suit you or not?"

Hsueeh P'an, upon hearing his mother speak in this strain, knew well
enough that he could not bring her round from her determination; and he
had no help but to issue the necessary directions to the servants to
make straight for the Jung Kuo mansion. Madame Wang had by this time
already come to know that in the lawsuit, in which Hsueeh P'an was
concerned, Chia Yue-ts'un had fortunately intervened and lent his good
offices, and was at length more composed in her mind. But when she again
saw that her eldest brother had been advanced to a post on the frontier,
she was just deploring that, deprived of the intercourse of the
relatives of her mother's family, how doubly lonely she would feel;
when, after the lapse of a few days, some one of the household brought
the unexpected announcement that "our lady, your sister, has, with the
young gentleman, the young lady and her whole household, entered the
capital and have dismounted from their vehicles outside the main
entrance." This news so delighted madame Wang that she rushed out, with
a few attendants, to greet them in the large Entrance Hall, and brought
Mrs. Hsueeh and the others into her house.

The two sisters were now reunited, at an advanced period of their lives,
so that mixed feelings of sorrow and joy thronged together, but on these
it is, of course, needless to dilate.

After conversing for a time on what had occurred, subsequent to their
separation, madame Wang took them to pay their obeisance to dowager lady
Chia. They then handed over the various kinds of presents and indigenous
articles, and after the whole family had been introduced, a banquet was
also spread to greet the guests.

Hsueeh P'an, having paid his respects to Chia Cheng and Chia Lien, was
likewise taken to see Chia She, Chia Chen and the other members.

Chia Cheng sent a messenger to tell madame Wang that "'aunt' Hsueeh had
already seen many springs and autumns, while their nephew was of tender
age, with no experience, so that there was every fear, were he to live
outside, that something would again take place. In the South-east corner
of our compound," (he sent word,) "there are in the Pear Fragrance
Court, over ten apartments, all of which are vacant and lying idle; and
were we to tell the servants to sweep them, and invite 'aunt' Hsueeh and
the young gentleman and lady to take up their quarters there, it would
be an extremely wise thing."

Madame Wang had in fact been entertaining the wish to keep them to live
with them, when dowager lady Chia also sent some one to say that, "Mrs.
Hsueeh should be asked to put up in the mansion in order that a greater
friendliness should exist between them all."

Mrs. Hsueeh herself had all along been desirous to live in one place with
her relatives, so as to be able to keep a certain check over her son,
fearing that, if they lived in a separate house outside, the natural
bent of his habits would run riot, and that some calamity would be
brought on; and she therefore, there and then, expressed her sense of
appreciation, and accepted the invitation. She further privately told
madame Wang in clear terms, that every kind of daily expense and general
contribution would have to be entirely avoided and withdrawn as that
would be the only thing to justify her to make any protracted stay. And
madame Wang aware that she had, in her home, no difficulty in this line,
promptly in fact complied with her wishes.

From this date it was that "aunt" Hsueeh and her children took up their
quarters in the Pear Fragrance Court.

This Court of Pear Fragrance had, we must explain, been at one time used
as a place for the quiet retirement of the Duke Jung in his advanced
years. It was on a small scale, but ingeniously laid out. There were, at
least, over ten structures. The front halls and the back houses were all
in perfect style. There was a separate door giving on to the street, and
the people of the household of Hsueeh P'an used this door to go in and
out. At the south-west quarter, there was also a side door, which
communicated with a narrow roadway. Beyond this narrow road, was the
eastern court of madame Wang's principal apartment; so that every day,
either after her repast, or in the evening, Mrs. Hsueeh would readily
come over and converse, on one thing and another, with dowager lady
Chia, or have a chat with madame Wang; while Pao-ch'ai came together,
day after day, with Tai yue, Ying-ch'un, her sisters and the other girls,
either to read, to play chess, or to do needlework, and the pleasure
which they derived was indeed perfect.

Hsueeh P'an however had all along from the first instance, been loth to
live in the Chia mansion, as he dreaded that with the discipline
enforced by his uncle, he would not be able to be his own master; but
his mother had made up her mind so positively to remain there, and what
was more, every one in the Chia mansion was most pressing in their
efforts to keep them, that there was no alternative for him but to take
up his quarters temporarily there, while he at the same time directed
servants to go and sweep the apartments of their own house, with a view
that they should move into them when they were ready.

But, contrary to expectation, after they had been in their quarters for
not over a month, Hsueeh P'an came to be on intimate relations with all
the young men among the kindred of the Chia mansion, the half of whom
were extravagant in their habits, so that great was, of course, his
delight to frequent them. To-day, they would come together to drink
wine; the next day to look at flowers. They even assembled to gamble, to
dissipate and to go everywhere and anywhere; leading, with all their
enticements, Hsueeh P'an so far astray, that he became far worse, by a
hundred times, than he was hitherto.

Although it must be conceded that Chia Cheng was in the education of his
children quite correct, and in the control of his family quite
systematic, yet in the first place, the clan was so large and the
members so numerous, that he was unable to attend to the entire
supervision; and, in the second place, the head of the family, at this
period, was Chia Chen, who, as the eldest grandchild of the Ning
mansion, had likewise now come into the inheritance of the official
status, with the result that all matters connected with the clan
devolved upon his sole and exclusive control. In the third place, public
as well as private concerns were manifold and complex, and being a man
of negligent disposition, he estimated ordinary affairs of so little
consequence that any respite from his official duties he devoted to no
more than the study of books and the playing of chess.

Furthermore, this Pear Fragrance Court was separated by two rows of
buildings from his quarters and was also provided with a separate door
opening into the street, so that, being able at their own heart's desire
to go out and to come in, these several young fellows could well indulge
their caprices, and gratify the bent of their minds.

Hence it was that Hsueeh P'an, in course of time gradually extinguished
from his memory every idea of shifting their quarters.

But what transpired, on subsequent days, the following chapter will
explain.




CHAPTER V.

  The spirit of Chia Pao-yue visits the confines of the Great Void.
  The Monitory Vision Fairy expounds, in ballads, the Dream of the Red
      Chamber.


Having in the fourth Chapter explained, to some degree, the
circumstances attending the settlement of the mother and children of the
Hsueeh family in the Jung mansion, and other incidental matters, we will
now revert to Lin Tai-yue.

Ever since her arrival in the Jung mansion, dowager lady Chia showed her
the highest sympathy and affection, so that in everything connected with
sleeping, eating, rising and accommodation she was on the same footing
as Pao-yue; with the result that Ying Ch'un, Hsi Ch'un and T'an Ch'un,
her three granddaughters, had after all to take a back seat. In fact,
the intimate and close friendliness and love which sprung up between the
two persons Pao-yue and Tai-yue, was, in the same degree, of an
exceptional kind, as compared with those existing between the others. By
daylight they were wont to walk together, and to sit together. At night,
they would desist together, and rest together. Really it was a case of
harmony in language and concord in ideas, of the consistency of varnish
or of glue, (a close friendship), when at this unexpected juncture there
came this girl, Hsueeh Pao-ch'ai, who, though not very much older in
years (than the others), was, nevertheless, in manner so correct, and in
features so beautiful that the consensus of opinion was that Tai-yue
herself could not come up to her standard.

What is more, in her ways Pao-Ch'ai was so full of good tact, so
considerate and accommodating, so unlike Tai-yue, who was supercilious,
self-confident, and without any regard for the world below, that the
natural consequence was that she soon completely won the hearts of the
lower classes. Even the whole number of waiting-maids would also for the
most part, play and joke with Pao-ch'ai. Hence it was that Tai-yue
fostered, in her heart, considerable feelings of resentment, but of this
however Pao-ch'ai had not the least inkling.

Pao-yue was, likewise, in the prime of his boyhood, and was, besides, as
far as the bent of his natural disposition was concerned, in every
respect absurd and perverse; regarding his cousins, whether male or
female, one and all with one common sentiment, and without any
distinction whatever between the degrees of distant or close
relationship. Sitting and sleeping, as he now was under the same roof
with Tai-yue in dowager lady Chia's suite of rooms, he naturally became
comparatively more friendly with her than with his other cousins; and
this friendliness led to greater intimacy and this intimacy once
established, rendered unavoidable the occurrence of the blight of
harmony from unforeseen slight pretexts.

These two had had on this very day, for some unknown reason, words
between them more or less unfriendly, and Tai-yue was again sitting all
alone in her room, giving way to tears. Pao-yue was once more within
himself quite conscience-smitten for his ungraceful remarks, and coming
forward, he humbly made advances, until, at length, Tai-yue little by
little came round.

As the plum blossom, in the eastern part of the garden of the Ning
mansion, was in full bloom, Chia Chen's spouse, Mrs. Yu, made
preparations for a collation, (purposing) to send invitations to dowager
lady Chia, mesdames Hsing, and Wang, and the other members of the
family, to come and admire the flowers; and when the day arrived the
first thing she did was to take Chia Jung and his wife, the two of them,
and come and ask them round in person. Dowager lady Chia and the other
inmates crossed over after their early meal; and they at once promenaded
the Hui Fang (Concentrated Fragrance) Garden. First tea was served, and
next wine; but the entertainment was no more than a family banquet of
the kindred of the two mansions of Ning and Jung, so that there was a
total lack of any novel or original recreation that could be put on
record.

After a little time, Pao-yue felt tired and languid and inclined for his
midday siesta. "Take good care," dowager lady Chia enjoined some of
them, "and stay with him, while he rests for a while, when he can come
back;" whereupon Chia Jung's wife, Mrs. Ch'in, smiled and said with
eagerness: "We got ready in here a room for uncle Pao, so let your
venerable ladyship set your mind at ease. Just hand him over to my
charge, and he will be quite safe. Mothers and sisters," she continued,
addressing herself to Pao-yue's nurses and waiting maids, "invite uncle
Pao to follow me in here."

Dowager lady Chia had always been aware of the fact that Mrs. Ch'in was
a most trustworthy person, naturally courteous and scrupulous, and in
every action likewise so benign and gentle; indeed the most estimable
among the whole number of her great grandsons' wives, so that when she
saw her about to go and attend to Pao-yue, she felt that, for a
certainty, everything would be well.

Mrs. Ch'in, there and then, led away a company of attendants, and came
into the rooms inside the drawing room. Pao-yue, upon raising his head,
and catching sight of a picture hung on the upper wall, representing a
human figure, in perfect style, the subject of which was a portrait of
Yen Li, speedily felt his heart sink within him.

There was also a pair of scrolls, the text of which was:

  A thorough insight into worldly matters arises from knowledge;
  A clear perception of human nature emanates from literary lore.

On perusal of these two sentences, albeit the room was sumptuous and
beautifully laid out, he would on no account remain in it. "Let us go at
once," he hastened to observe, "let us go at once."

Mrs. Ch'in upon hearing his objections smiled. "If this," she said, "is
really not nice, where are you going? if you won't remain here, well
then come into my room."

Pao-yue nodded his head and gave a faint grin.

"Where do you find the propriety," a nurse thereupon interposed, "of an
uncle going to sleep in the room of a nephew's wife?"

"Ai ya!" exclaimed Mrs. Ch'in laughing, "I don't mind whether he gets
angry or not (at what I say); but how old can he be as to reverentially
shun all these things? Why my brother was with me here last month;
didn't you see him? he's, true enough, of the same age as uncle Pao, but
were the two of them to stand side by side, I suspect that he would be
much higher in stature."

"How is it," asked Pao-yue, "that I didn't see him? Bring him along and
let me have a look at him!"

"He's separated," they all ventured as they laughed, "by a distance of
twenty or thirty li, and how can he be brought along? but you'll see him
some day."

As they were talking, they reached the interior of Mrs. Ch'in's
apartments. As soon as they got in, a very faint puff of sweet fragrance
was wafted into their nostrils. Pao-yue readily felt his eyes itch and
his bones grow weak. "What a fine smell!" he exclaimed several
consecutive times.

Upon entering the apartments, and gazing at the partition wall, he saw a
picture the handiwork of T'ang Po-hu, consisting of Begonias drooping in
the spring time; on either side of which was one of a pair of scrolls,
written by Ch'in Tai-hsue, a Literary Chancellor of the Sung era, running
as follows:

  A gentle chill doth circumscribe the dreaming man, because the spring
      is cold.
  The fragrant whiff, which wafts itself into man's nose, is the perfume
      of wine!

On the table was a mirror, one which had been placed, in days of yore,
in the Mirror Palace of the Emperor Wu Tse-t'ien. On one side stood a
gold platter, in which Fei Yen, who lived in the Ch'ao state, used to
stand and dance. In this platter, was laid a quince, which An Lu-shan
had flung at the Empress T'ai Chen, inflicting a wound on her breast. In
the upper part of the room, stood a divan ornamented with gems, on which
the Emperor's daughter, Shou Ch'ang, was wont to sleep, in the Han Chang
Palace Hanging, were curtains embroidered with strings of pearls, by
T'ung Ch'ang, the Imperial Princess.

"It's nice in here, it's nice in here," exclaimed Pao-yue with a chuckle.

"This room of mine," observed Mrs. Ch'in smilingly, "is I think, good
enough for even spirits to live in!" and, as she uttered these words,
she with her own hands, opened a gauze coverlet, which had been washed
by Hsi Shih, and removed a bridal pillow, which had been held in the
arms of Hung Niang. Instantly, the nurses attended to Pao-yue, until he
had laid down comfortably; when they quietly dispersed, leaving only the
four waiting maids: Hsi Jen, Ch'iu Wen, Ch'ing Wen and She Yueh to keep
him company.

"Mind be careful, as you sit under the eaves," Mrs. Ch'in recommended
the young waiting maids, "that the cats do not start a fight!"

Pao-yue then closed his eyes, and, little by little, became drowsy, and
fell asleep.

It seemed to him just as if Mrs. Ch'in was walking ahead of him.
Forthwith, with listless and unsettled step, he followed Mrs. Ch'in to
some spot or other, where he saw carnation-like railings, jade-like
steps, verdant trees and limpid pools--a spot where actually no trace of
any human being could be met with, where of the shifting mundane dust
little had penetrated.

Pao-yue felt, in his dream, quite delighted. "This place," he mused, "is
pleasant, and I may as well spend my whole lifetime in here! though I
may have to lose my home, I'm quite ready for the sacrifice, for it's
far better being here than being flogged, day after day, by father,
mother, and teacher."

While he pondered in this erratic strain, he suddenly heard the voice of
some human being at the back of the rocks, giving vent to this song:

  Like scattering clouds doth fleet a vernal dream;
  The transient flowers pass like a running stream;
  Maidens and youths bear this, ye all, in mind;
  In useless grief what profit will ye find?

Pao-yue perceived that the voice was that of a girl. The song was barely
at an end, when he soon espied in the opposite direction, a beautiful
girl advancing with majestic and elastic step; a girl quite unlike any
ordinary mortal being. There is this poem, which gives an adequate
description of her:

  Lo she just quits the willow bank; and sudden now she issues from the
      flower-bedecked house;
  As onward alone she speeds, she startles the birds perched in the
      trees, by the pavilion; to which as she draws nigh, her shadow
      flits by the verandah!
  Her fairy clothes now flutter in the wind! a fragrant perfume like
      unto musk or olea is wafted in the air; Her apparel lotus-like is
      sudden wont to move; and the jingle of her ornaments strikes the
      ear.
  Her dimpled cheeks resemble, as they smile, a vernal peach; her
      kingfisher coiffure is like a cumulus of clouds; her lips part
      cherry-like; her pomegranate-like teeth conceal a fragrant
      breath.
  Her slender waist, so beauteous to look at, is like the skipping snow
      wafted by a gust of wind; the sheen of her pearls and kingfisher
      trinkets abounds with splendour, green as the feathers of a duck,
      and yellow as the plumes of a goose;
  Now she issues to view, and now is hidden among the flowers; beautiful
      she is when displeased, beautiful when in high spirits; with
      lissome step, she treads along the pond, as if she soars on wings
      or sways in the air.
  Her eyebrows are crescent moons, and knit under her smiles; she
      speaks, and yet she seems no word to utter; her lotus-like feet
      with ease pursue their course; she stops, and yet she seems still
      to be in motion; the charms of her figure all vie with ice in
      purity, and in splendour with precious gems; Lovely is her
      brilliant attire, so full of grandeur and refined grace.
  Loveable her countenance, as if moulded from some fragrant substance,
      or carved from white jade; elegant is her person, like a phoenix,
      dignified like a dragon soaring high.
  What is her chastity like? Like a white plum in spring with snow
      nestling in its broken skin; Her purity? Like autumn orchids
      bedecked with dewdrops.
  Her modesty? Like a fir-tree growing in a barren plain; Her
      comeliness? Like russet clouds reflected in a limpid pool.
  Her gracefulness? Like a dragon in motion wriggling in a stream;
      Her refinement? Like the rays of the moon shooting on to a cool
      river.
  Sure is she to put Hsi Tzu to shame! Bound to put Wang Ch'iang to the
      blush! What a remarkable person! Where was she born? and whence
      does she come?
  One thing is true that in Fairy-land there is no second like her! that
      in the Purple Courts of Heaven there is no one fit to be her peer!
  Forsooth, who can it be, so surpassingly beautiful!

Pao-yue, upon realising that she was a fairy, was much elated; and with
eagerness advanced and made a bow.

"My divine sister," he ventured, as he put on a smile. "I don't know
whence you come, and whither you are going. Nor have I any idea what
this place is, but I make bold to entreat that you would take my hand
and lead me on."

"My abode," replied the Fairy, "is above the Heavens of Divested
Animosities, and in the ocean of Discharged Sorrows. I'm the Fairy of
Monitory Vision, of the cave of Drooping Fragrance, in the mount of
Emitted Spring, within the confines of the Great Void. I preside over
the voluptuous affections and sensual debts among the mortal race, and
supervise in the dusty world, the envies of women and the lusts of man.
It's because I've recently come to hear that the retribution for
voluptuousness extends up to this place, that I betake myself here in
order to find suitable opportunities of disseminating mutual affections.
My encounter with you now is also not a matter of accident! This spot is
not distant from my confines. I have nothing much there besides a cup of
the tender buds of tea plucked by my own hands, and a pitcher of
luscious wine, fermented by me as well as several spritelike singing and
dancing maidens of great proficiency, and twelve ballads of spiritual
song, recently completed, on the Dream of the Red Chamber; but won't you
come along with me for a stroll?"

Pao-yue, at this proposal, felt elated to such an extraordinary degree
that he could skip from joy, and there and then discarding from his mind
all idea of where Mrs. Ch'in was, he readily followed the Fairy.

They reached some spot, where there was a stone tablet, put up in a
horizontal position, on which were visible the four large characters:
"The confines of the Great Void," on either side of which was one of a
pair of scrolls, with the two antithetical sentences:

  When falsehood stands for truth, truth likewise becomes false;
  When naught be made to aught, aught changes into naught!

Past the Portal stood the door of a Palace, and horizontally, above this
door, were the four large characters: "The Sea of Retribution, the
Heaven of Love." There were also a pair of scrolls, with the inscription
in large characters:

  Passion, alas! thick as the earth, and lofty as the skies, from ages
      past to the present hath held incessant sway;
  How pitiful your lot! ye lustful men and women envious, that your
      voluptuous debts should be so hard to pay!

Pao-yue, after perusal, communed with his own heart. "Is it really so!"
he thought, "but I wonder what implies the passion from old till now,
and what are the voluptuous debts! Henceforward, I must enlighten
myself!"

Pao-yue was bent upon this train of thoughts when he unwittingly
attracted several evil spirits into his heart, and with speedy step he
followed in the track of the fairy, and entered two rows of doors when
he perceived that the Lateral Halls were, on both sides, full of tablets
and scrolls, the number of which he could not in one moment ascertain.
He however discriminated in numerous places the inscriptions: The Board
of Lustful Love; the Board of contracted grudges; The Board of Matutinal
sobs; the Board of nocturnal tears; the Board of vernal affections; and
the Board of autumnal anguish.

After he had perused these inscriptions, he felt impelled to turn round
and address the Fairy. "May I venture to trouble my Fairy," he said, "to
take me along for a turn into the interior of each of these Boards? May
I be allowed, I wonder, to do so?"

"Inside each of these Boards," explained the Fairy, "are accumulated the
registers with the records of all women of the whole world; of those who
have passed away, as well as of those who have not as yet come into it,
and you, with your mortal eyes and human body, could not possibly be
allowed to know anything in anticipation."

But would Pao-yue, upon hearing these words, submit to this decree? He
went on to implore her permission again and again, until the Fairy
casting her eye upon the tablet of the board in front of her observed,
"Well, all right! you may go into this board and reap some transient
pleasure."

Pao-yue was indescribably joyous, and, as he raised his head, he
perceived that the text on the tablet consisted of the three characters:
the Board of Ill-fated lives; and that on each side was a scroll with
the inscription:

  Upon one's self are mainly brought regrets in spring and autumn gloom;
  A face, flowerlike may be and moonlike too; but beauty all for whom?

Upon perusal of the scroll Pao-yue was, at once, the more stirred with
admiration; and, as he crossed the door, and reached the interior, the
only things that struck his eye were about ten large presses, the whole
number of which were sealed with paper slips; on every one of these
slips, he perceived that there were phrases peculiar to each province.

Pao-yue was in his mind merely bent upon discerning, from the rest, the
slip referring to his own native village, when he espied, on the other
side, a slip with the large characters: "the Principal Record of the
Twelve Maidens of Chin Ling."

"What is the meaning," therefore inquired Pao-yue, "of the Principal
Record of the Twelve Maidens of Chin Ling?"

"As this is the record," explained the Fairy, "of the most excellent and
prominent girls in your honourable province, it is, for this reason,
called the Principal Record."

"I've often heard people say," observed Pao-yue, "that Chin Ling is of
vast extent; and how can there only be twelve maidens in it! why, at
present, in our own family alone, there are more or less several
hundreds of young girls!"

The Fairy gave a faint smile. "Through there be," she rejoined, "so
large a number of girls in your honourable province, those only of any
note have been selected and entered in this record. The two presses, on
the two sides, contain those who are second best; while, for all who
remain, as they are of the ordinary run, there are, consequently, no
registers to make any entry of them in."

Pao-yue upon looking at the press below, perceived the inscription:
"Secondary Record of the twelve girls of Chin Ling;" while again in
another press was inscribed: "Supplementary Secondary Record of the
Twelve girls of Chin Ling." Forthwith stretching out his hand, Pao-yue
opened first the doors of the press, containing the "supplementary
secondary Record," extracted a volume of the registers, and opened it.
When he came to examine it, he saw on the front page a representation of
something, which, though bearing no resemblance to a human being,
presented, at the same time, no similitude to scenery; consisting simply
of huge blotches made with ink. The whole paper was full of nothing else
but black clouds and turbid mists, after which appeared the traces of a
few characters, explaining that--

  A cloudless moon is rare forsooth to see,
  And pretty clouds so soon scatter and flee!
  Thy heart is deeper than the heavens are high,
  Thy frame consists of base ignominy!
  Thy looks and clever mind resentment will provoke,
  And thine untimely death vile slander will evoke!
  A loving noble youth in vain for love will yearn.

After reading these lines, Pao-yue looked below, where was pictured a
bouquet of fresh flowers and a bed covered with tattered matting. There
were also several distiches running as follows:

  Thy self-esteem for kindly gentleness is but a fancy vain!
  Thy charms that they can match the olea or orchid, but thoughts inane!
  While an actor will, envious lot! with fortune's smiles be born,
  A youth of noble birth will, strange to say, be luckless and forlorn.

Pao-yue perused these sentences, but could not unfold their meaning, so,
at once discarding this press, he went over and opened the door of the
press of the "Secondary Records" and took out a book, in which, on
examination, he found a representation of a twig of Olea fragrans.
Below, was a pond, the water of which was parched up and the mud dry,
the lotus flowers decayed, and even the roots dead. At the back were
these lines:

  The lotus root and flower but one fragrance will give;
  How deep alas! the wounds of thy life's span will be;
  What time a desolate tree in two places will live,
  Back to its native home the fragrant ghost will flee!

Pao-yue read these lines, but failed to understand what they meant. He
then went and fetched the "Principal Record," and set to looking it
over. He saw on the first page a picture of two rotten trees, while on
these trees was suspended a jade girdle. There was also a heap of snow,
and under this snow was a golden hair-pin. There were in addition these
four lines in verse:

  Bitter thy cup will be, e'en were the virtue thine to stop the loom,
  Thine though the gift the willow fluff to sing, pity who will thy
      doom?
  High in the trees doth hang the girdle of white jade,
  And lo! among the snow the golden pin is laid!

To Pao-yue the meaning was again, though he read the lines over, quite
unintelligible. He was, about to make inquiries, but he felt convinced
that the Fairy would be both to divulge the decrees of Heaven; and
though intent upon discarding the book, he could not however tear
himself away from it. Forthwith, therefore, he prosecuted a further
perusal of what came next, when he caught sight of a picture of a bow.
On this bow hung a citron. There was also this ode:

  Full twenty years right and wrong to expound will be thy fate!
  What place pomegranate blossoms come in bloom will face the Palace
      Gate!
  The third portion of spring, of the first spring in beauty short will
      fall!
  When tiger meets with hare thou wilt return to sleep perennial.

Further on, was also a sketch of two persons flying a kite; a broad
expanse of sea, and a large vessel; while in this vessel was a girl, who
screened her face bedewed with tears. These four lines were likewise
visible:

  Pure and bright will be thy gifts, thy purpose very high;
  But born thou wilt be late in life and luck be passed by;
  At the tomb feast thou wilt repine tearful along the stream,
  East winds may blow, but home miles off will be, even in dream.

After this followed a picture of several streaks of fleeting clouds, and
of a creek whose waters were exhausted, with the text:

  Riches and honours too what benefit are they?
  In swaddling clothes thou'lt be when parents pass away;
  The rays will slant, quick as the twinkle of an eye;
  The Hsiang stream will recede, the Ch'u clouds onward fly!

Then came a picture of a beautiful gem, which had fallen into the mire,
with the verse:

  Thine aim is chastity, but chaste thou wilt not be;
  Abstraction is thy faith, but void thou may'st not see;
  Thy precious, gemlike self will, pitiful to say,
  Into the mundane mire collapse at length some day.

A rough sketch followed of a savage wolf, in pursuit of a beautiful
girl, trying to pounce upon her as he wished to devour her. This was the
burden of the distich:

  Thy mate is like a savage wolf prowling among the hills;
  His wish once gratified a haughty spirit his heart fills!
  Though fair thy form like flowers or willows in the golden moon,
  Upon the yellow beam to hang will shortly be its doom.

Below, was an old temple, in the interior of which was a beautiful
person, just in the act of reading the religious manuals, as she sat all
alone; with this inscription:

  In light esteem thou hold'st the charms of the three springs for their
      short-liv'd fate;
  Thine attire of past years to lay aside thou chang'st, a Taoist dress
      to don;
  How sad, alas! of a reputed house and noble kindred the scion,
  Alone, behold! she sleeps under a glimmering light, an old idol for
      mate.

Next in order came a hill of ice, on which stood a hen-phoenix, while
under it was this motto:

  When time ends, sure coincidence, the phoenix doth alight;
  The talents of this human form all know and living see,
  For first to yield she kens, then to control, and third genial to be;
  But sad to say, things in Chin Ling are in more sorry plight.

This was succeeded by a representation of a desolate village, and a
dreary inn. A pretty girl sat in there, spinning thread. These were the
sentiments affixed below:

  When riches will have flown will honours then avail?
  When ruin breaks your home, e'en relatives will fail!
  But sudden through the aid extended to Dame Liu,
  A friend in need fortune will make to rise for you.

Following these verses, was drawn a pot of Orchids, by the side of
which, was a beautiful maiden in a phoenix-crown and cloudy mantle
(bridal dress); and to this picture was appended this device:

  What time spring wanes, then fades the bloom of peach as well as plum!
  Who ever can like a pot of the olea be winsome!
  With ice thy purity will vie, vain their envy will be!
  In vain a laughing-stock people will try to make of thee.

At the end of this poetical device, came the representation of a lofty
edifice, on which was a beauteous girl, suspending herself on a beam to
commit suicide; with this verse:

  Love high as heav'n, love ocean-wide, thy lovely form will don;
  What time love will encounter love, license must rise wanton;
  Why hold that all impiety in Jung doth find its spring,
  The source of trouble, verily, is centred most in Ning.

Pao-yue was still bent upon prosecuting his perusal, when the Fairy
perceiving that his intellect was eminent and bright, and his natural
talents quickwitted, and apprehending lest the decrees of heaven should
be divulged, hastily closed the Book of Record, and addressed herself to
Pao-yue. "Come along with me," she said smiling, "and see some wonderful
scenery. What's the need of staying here and beating this gourd of
ennui?"

In a dazed state, Pao-yue listlessly discarded the record, and again
followed in the footsteps of the Fairy. On their arrival at the back, he
saw carnation portieres, and embroidered curtains, ornamented pillars,
and carved eaves. But no words can adequately give an idea of the
vermilion apartments glistening with splendour, of the floors garnished
with gold, of the snow reflecting lustrous windows, of the palatial
mansions made of gems. He also saw fairyland flowers, beautiful and
fragrant, and extraordinary vegetation, full of perfume. The spot was
indeed elysian.

He again heard the Fairy observe with a smiling face: "Come out all of
you at once and greet the honoured guest!"

These words were scarcely completed, when he espied fairies walk out of
the mansion, all of whom were, with their dangling lotus sleeves, and
their fluttering feather habiliments, as comely as spring flowers, and
as winsome as the autumn moon. As soon as they caught sight of Pao-yue,
they all, with one voice, resentfully reproached the Monitory Vision
Fairy. "Ignorant as to who the honoured guest could be," they argued,
"we hastened to come out to offer our greetings simply because you,
elder sister, had told us that, on this day, and at this very time,
there would be sure to come on a visit, the spirit of the younger sister
of Chiang Chu. That's the reason why we've been waiting for ever so
long; and now why do you, in lieu of her, introduce this vile object to
contaminate the confines of pure and spotless maidens?"

As soon as Pao-yue heard these remarks, he was forthwith plunged in such
a state of consternation that he would have retired, but he found it
impossible to do so. In fact, he felt the consciousness of the foulness
and corruption of his own nature quite intolerable. The Monitory Vision
Fairy promptly took Pao-yue's hand in her own, and turning towards her
younger sisters, smiled and explained: "You, and all of you, are not
aware of the why and wherefore. To-day I did mean to have gone to the
Jung mansion to fetch Chiang Chu, but as I went by the Ning mansion, I
unexpectedly came across the ghosts of the two dukes of Jung and Ning,
who addressed me in this wise: 'Our family has, since the dynasty
established itself on the Throne, enjoyed merit and fame, which pervaded
many ages, and riches and honours transmitted from generation to
generation. One hundred years have already elapsed, but this good
fortune has now waned, and this propitious luck is exhausted; so much so
that they could not be retrieved! Our sons and grandsons may be many,
but there is no one among them who has the means to continue the family
estate, with the exception of our kindred grandson, Pao-yue alone, who,
though perverse in disposition and wayward by nature, is nevertheless
intelligent and quick-witted and qualified in a measure to give effect
to our hopes. But alas! the good fortune of our family is entirely
decayed, so that we fear there is no person to incite him to enter the
right way! Fortunately you worthy fairy come at an unexpected moment,
and we venture to trust that you will, above all things, warn him
against the foolish indulgence of inordinate desire, lascivious
affections and other such things, in the hope that he may, at your
instigation, be able to escape the snares of those girls who will allure
him with their blandishments, and to enter on the right track; and we
two brothers will be ever grateful.'

"On language such as this being addressed to me, my feelings of
commiseration naturally burst forth; and I brought him here, and bade
him, first of all, carefully peruse the records of the whole lives of
the maidens in his family, belonging to the three grades, the upper,
middle and lower, but as he has not yet fathomed the import, I have
consequently led him into this place to experience the vision of
drinking, eating, singing and licentious love, in the hope, there is no
saying, of his at length attaining that perception."

Having concluded these remarks, she led Pao-yue by the hand into the
apartment, where he felt a whiff of subtle fragrance, but what it was
that reached his nostrils he could not tell.

To Pao-yue's eager and incessant inquiries, the Fairy made reply with a
sardonic smile. "This perfume," she said, "is not to be found in the
world, and how could you discern what it is? This is made of the essence
of the first sprouts of rare herbs, growing on all hills of fame and
places of superior excellence, admixed with the oil of every species of
splendid shrubs in precious groves, and is called the marrow of
Conglomerated Fragrance."

At these words Pao-yue was, of course, full of no other feeling than
wonder.

The whole party advanced and took their seats, and a young maidservant
presented tea, which Pao-yue found of pure aroma, of excellent flavour
and of no ordinary kind. "What is the name of this tea?" he therefore
asked; upon which the Fairy explained. "This tea," she added,
"originates from the Hills of Emitted Spring and the Valley of Drooping
Fragrance, and is, besides, brewed in the night dew, found on spiritual
plants and divine leaves. The name of this tea is 'one thousand red in
one hole.'"

At these words Pao-yue nodded his head, and extolled its qualities.
Espying in the room lutes, with jasper mountings, and tripods, inlaid
with gems, antique paintings, and new poetical works, which were to be
seen everywhere, he felt more than ever in a high state of delight.
Below the windows, were also shreds of velvet sputtered about and a
toilet case stained with the traces of time and smudged with cosmetic;
while on the partition wall was likewise suspended a pair of scrolls,
with the inscription:

  A lonesome, small, ethereal, beauteous nook!
  What help is there, but Heaven's will to brook?

Pao-yue having completed his inspection felt full of admiration, and
proceeded to ascertain the names and surnames of the Fairies. One was
called the Fairy of Lustful Dreams; another "the High Ruler of
Propagated Passion;" the name of one was "the Golden Maiden of
Perpetuated Sorrow;" of another the "Intelligent Maiden of Transmitted
Hatred." (In fact,) the respective Taoist appellations were not of one
and the same kind.

In a short while, young maid-servants came in and laid the table, put
the chairs in their places, and spread out wines and eatables. There
were actually crystal tankards overflowing with luscious wines, and
amber glasses full to the brim with pearly strong liquors. But still
less need is there to give any further details about the sumptuousness
of the refreshments.

Pao-yue found it difficult, on account of the unusual purity of the
bouquet of the wine, to again restrain himself from making inquiries
about it.

"This wine," observed the Monitory Dream Fairy, "is made of the twigs of
hundreds of flowers, and the juice of ten thousands of trees, with the
addition of must composed of unicorn marrow, and yeast prepared with
phoenix milk. Hence the name of 'Ten thousand Beauties in one Cup' was
given to it."

Pao-yue sang its incessant praise, and, while he sipped his wine, twelve
dancing girls came forward, and requested to be told what songs they
were to sing.

"Take," suggested the Fairy, "the newly-composed Twelve Sections of the
Dream of the Red Chamber, and sing them."

The singing girls signified their obedience, and forthwith they lightly
clapped the castagnettes and gently thrummed the virginals. These were
the words which they were heard to sing:

  At the time of the opening of the heavens and the laying out of the
      earth chaos prevailed.

They had just sung this one line when the Fairy exclaimed: "This ballad
is unlike the ballads written in the dusty world whose purport is to
hand down remarkable events, in which the distinction of scholars,
girls, old men and women, and fools is essential, and in which are
furthermore introduced the lyrics of the Southern and Northern Palaces.
These fairy songs consist either of elegaic effusions on some person or
impressions of some occurrence or other, and are impromptu songs readily
set to the music of wind or string instruments, so that any one who is
not cognisant of their gist cannot appreciate the beauties contained in
them. So you are not likely, I fear, to understand this lyric with any
clearness; and unless you first peruse the text and then listen to the
ballad, you will, instead of pleasure, feel as if you were chewing wax
(devoid of any zest)."

After these remarks, she turned her head round, and directed a young
maid-servant to fetch the text of the Dream of the Red Chamber, which
she handed to Pao-yue, who took it over; and as he followed the words
with his eyes, with his ears he listened to the strains of this song:

Preface of the Bream of the Red Chamber.--When the Heavens were opened
and earth was laid out chaos prevailed! What was the germ of love? It
arises entirely from the strength of licentious love.

What day, by the will of heaven, I felt wounded at heart, and what time
I was at leisure, I made an attempt to disburden my sad heart; and with
this object in view I indited this Dream of the Bed Chamber, on the
subject of a disconsolate gold trinket and an unfortunate piece of jade.

Waste of a whole Lifetime. All maintain that the match between gold and
jade will be happy. All I can think of is the solemn oath contracted in
days gone by by the plant and stone! Vain will I gaze upon the snow,
Hsueeh, [Pao-ch'ai], pure as crystal and lustrous like a gem of the
eminent priest living among the hills! Never will I forget the noiseless
Fairy Grove, Lin [Tai-yue], beyond the confines of the mortal world!
Alas! now only have I come to believe that human happiness is
incomplete; and that a couple may be bound by the ties of wedlock for
life, but that after all their hearts are not easy to lull into
contentment.

Vain knitting of the brows. The one is a spirit flower of Fairyland; the
other is a beautiful jade without a blemish. Do you maintain that their
union will not be remarkable? Why how then is it that he has come to
meet her again in this existence? If the union will you say, be strange,
how is it then that their love affair will be but empty words? The one
in her loneliness will give way to useless sighs. The other in vain will
yearn and crave. The one will be like the reflection of the moon in
water; the other like a flower reflected in a mirror. Consider, how many
drops of tears can there be in the eyes? and how could they continue to
drop from autumn to winter and from spring to flow till summer time?

But to come to Pao-yue. After he had heard these ballads, so diffuse and
vague, he failed to see any point of beauty in them; but the plaintive
melody of the sound was nevertheless sufficient to drive away his spirit
and exhilarate his soul. Hence it was that he did not make any inquiries
about the arguments, and that he did not ask about the matter treated,
but simply making these ballads the means for the time being of
dispelling melancholy, he therefore went on with the perusal of what
came below.

Despicable Spirit of Death! You will be rejoicing that glory is at its
height when hateful death will come once again, and with eyes wide with
horror, you will discard all things, and dimly and softly the fragrant
spirit will waste and dissolve! You will yearn for native home, but
distant will be the way, and lofty the mountains. Hence it is that you
will betake yourself in search of father and mother, while they lie
under the influence of a dream, and hold discourse with them. "Your
child," you will say, "has already trodden the path of death! Oh my
parents, it behoves you to speedily retrace your steps and make good
your escape!"

Separated from Relatives. You will speed on a journey of three thousand
li at the mercy of wind and rain, and tear yourself from all your family
ties and your native home! Your fears will be lest anguish should do any
harm to your parents in their failing years! "Father and mother," you
will bid them, "do not think with any anxiety of your child. From ages
past poverty as well as success have both had a fixed destiny; and is it
likely that separation and reunion are not subject to predestination?
Though we may now be far apart in two different places, we must each of
us try and preserve good cheer. Your abject child has, it is true, gone
from home, but abstain from distressing yourselves on her account!"

Sorrow in the midst of Joy. While wrapped as yet in swaddling clothes,
father and mother, both alas! will depart, and dwell though you will in
that mass of gauze, who is there who will know how to spoil you with any
fond attention? Born you will be fortunately with ample moral courage,
and high-minded and boundless resources, for your parents will not have,
in the least, their child's secret feelings at heart! You will be like a
moon appearing to view when the rain holds up, shedding its rays upon
the Jade Hall; or a gentle breeze (wafting its breath upon it). Wedded
to a husband, fairy like fair and accomplished, you will enjoy a
happiness enduring as the earth and perennial as the Heavens! and you
will be the means of snapping asunder the bitter fate of your youth!
But, after all, the clouds will scatter in Kao T'ang and the waters of
the Hsiang river will get parched! This is the inevitable destiny of
dissolution and continuance which prevails in the mortal world, and what
need is there to indulge in useless grief?

Intolerable to the world. Your figure will be as winsome as an olea
fragrans; your talents as ample as those of a Fairy! You will by nature
be so haughty that of the whole human race few will be like you! You
will look upon a meat diet as one of dirt, and treat splendour as coarse
and loathsome! And yet you will not be aware that your high notions will
bring upon you the excessive hatred of man! You will be very eager in
your desire after chastity, but the human race will despise you! Alas,
you will wax old in that antique temple hall under a faint light, where
you will waste ungrateful for beauty, looks and freshness! But after all
you will still be worldly, corrupt and unmindful of your vows; just like
a spotless white jade you will be whose fate is to fall into the mire!
And what need will there be for the grandson of a prince or the son of a
duke to deplore that his will not be the good fortune (of winning your
affections)?

The Voluptuary. You will resemble a wolf in the mountains! a savage
beast devoid of all human feeling! Regardless in every way of the
obligations of days gone by, your sole pleasure will be in the
indulgence of haughtiness, extravagance, licentiousness and dissolute
habits! You will be inordinate in your conjugal affections, and look
down upon the beautiful charms of the child of a marquis, as if they
were cat-tail rush or willow; trampling upon the honourable daughter of
a ducal mansion, as if she were one of the common herd. Pitiful to say,
the fragrant spirit and beauteous ghost will in a year softly and gently
pass away!

The Perception that all things are transient like flowers. You will look
lightly upon the three springs and regard the blush of the peach and the
green of the willow as of no avail. You will beat out the fire of
splendour, and treat solitary retirement as genial! What is it that you
say about the delicate peaches in the heavens (marriage) being
excellent, and the petals of the almond in the clouds being plentiful
(children)? Let him who has after all seen one of them, (really a mortal
being) go safely through the autumn, (wade safely through old age),
behold the people in the white Poplar village groan and sigh; and the
spirits under the green maple whine and moan! Still more wide in expanse
than even the heavens is the dead vegetation which covers the graves!
The moral is this, that the burden of man is poverty one day and
affluence another; that bloom in spring, and decay in autumn, constitute
the doom of vegetable life! In the same way, this calamity of birth and
the visitation of death, who is able to escape? But I have heard it said
that there grows in the western quarter a tree called the P'o So
(Patient Bearing) which bears the fruit of Immortal life!

The bane of Intelligence. Yours will be the power to estimate, in a
thorough manner, the real motives of all things, as yours will be
intelligence of an excessive degree; but instead (of reaping any
benefit) you will cast the die of your own existence! The heart of your
previous life is already reduced to atoms, and when you shall have died,
your nature will have been intelligent to no purpose! Your home will be
in easy circumstances; your family will enjoy comforts; but your
connexions will, at length, fall a prey to death, and the inmates of
your family scatter, each one of you speeding in a different direction,
making room for others! In vain, you will have harassed your mind with
cankering thoughts for half a lifetime; for it will be just as if you
had gone through the confused mazes of a dream on the third watch!
Sudden a crash (will be heard) like the fall of a spacious palace, and a
dusky gloominess (will supervene) such as is caused by a lamp about to
spend itself! Alas! a spell of happiness will be suddenly (dispelled by)
adversity! Woe is man in the world! for his ultimate doom is difficult
to determine!

Leave behind a residue of happiness! Hand down an excess of happiness;
hand down an excess of happiness! Unexpectedly you will come across a
benefactor! Fortunate enough your mother, your own mother, will have
laid by a store of virtue and secret meritorious actions! My advice to
you, mankind, is to relieve the destitute and succour the distressed! Do
not resemble those who will harp after lucre and show themselves
unmindful of the ties of relationship: that wolflike maternal uncle of
yours and that impostor of a brother! True it is that addition and
subtraction, increase and decrease, (reward and punishment,) rest in the
hands of Heaven above!

Splendour at last. Loving affection in a mirror will be still more
ephemeral than fame in a dream. That fine splendour will fleet how soon!
Make no further allusion to embroidered curtain, to bridal coverlet; for
though you may come to wear on your head a pearl-laden coronet, and, on
your person, a jacket ornamented with phoenixes, yours will not
nevertheless be the means to atone for the short life (of your husband)!
Though the saying is that mankind should not have, in their old age, the
burden of poverty to bear, yet it is also essential that a store of
benevolent deeds should be laid up for the benefit of sons and
grandsons! (Your son) may come to be dignified in appearance and wear on
his head the official tassel, and on his chest may be suspended the gold
seal resplendent in lustre; he may be imposing in his majesty, and he
may rise high in status and emoluments, but the dark and dreary way
which leads to death is short! Are the generals and ministers who have
been from ages of old still in the flesh, forsooth? They exist only in a
futile name handed down to posterity to reverence!

Death ensues when things propitious reign! Upon the ornamented beam will
settle at the close of spring the fragrant dust! Your reckless
indulgence of licentious love and your naturally moonlike face will soon
be the source of the ruin of a family. The decadence of the family
estate will emanate entirely from Ching; while the wane of the family
affairs will be entirely attributable to the fault of Ning! Licentious
love will be the main reason of the long-standing grudge.

The flying birds each perch upon the trees! The family estates of those
in official positions will fade! The gold and silver of the rich and
honoured will be scattered! those who will have conferred benefit will,
even in death, find the means of escape! those devoid of human feelings
will reap manifest retribution! Those indebted for a life will make, in
due time, payment with their lives; those indebted for tears have
already (gone) to exhaust their tears! Mutual injuries will be revenged
in no light manner! Separation and reunion will both alike be determined
by predestination! You wish to know why your life will be short; look
into your previous existence! Verily, riches and honours, which will
come with old age, will likewise be a question of chance! Those who will
hold the world in light esteem will retire within the gate of
abstraction; while those who will be allured by enticement will have
forfeited their lives (The Chia family will fulfil its destiny) as
surely as birds take to the trees after they have exhausted all they had
to eat, and which as they drop down will pile up a hoary, vast and lofty
heap of dust, (leaving) indeed a void behind!

When the maidens had finished the ballads, they went on to sing the
"Supplementary Record;" but the Monitory Vision Fairy, perceiving the
total absence of any interest in Pao-yue, heaved a sigh. "You silly
brat!" she exclaimed. "What! haven't you, even now, attained
perception!"

"There's no need for you to go on singing," speedily observed Pao-yue, as
he interrupted the singing maidens; and feeling drowsy and dull, he
pleaded being under the effects of wine, and begged to be allowed to lie
down.

The Fairy then gave orders to clear away the remains of the feast, and
escorted Pao-yue to a suite of female apartments, where the splendour of
such objects as were laid out was a thing which he had not hitherto
seen. But what evoked in him wonder still more intense, was the sight,
at an early period, of a girl seated in the room, who, in the freshness
of her beauty and winsomeness of her charms, bore some resemblance to
Pao-ch'ai, while, in elegance and comeliness, on the other hand, to
Tai-yu.

While he was plunged in a state of perplexity, the Fairy suddenly
remarked: "All those female apartments and ladies' chambers in so many
wealthy and honourable families in the world are, without exception,
polluted by voluptuous opulent puppets and by all that bevy of
profligate girls. But still more despicable are those from old till now
numberless dissolute roues, one and all of whom maintain that libidinous
affections do not constitute lewdness; and who try, further, to prove
that licentious love is not tantamount to lewdness. But all these
arguments are mere apologies for their shortcomings, and a screen for
their pollutions; for if libidinous affection be lewdness, still more
does the perception of licentious love constitute lewdness. Hence it is
that the indulgence of sensuality and the gratification of licentious
affection originate entirely from a relish of lust, as well as from a
hankering after licentious love. Lo you, who are the object of my love,
are the most lewd being under the heavens from remote ages to the
present time!"

Pao-yue was quite dumbstruck by what he heard, and hastily smiling, he
said by way of reply: "My Fairy labours under a misapprehension. Simply
because of my reluctance to read my books my parents have, on repeated
occasions, extended to me injunction and reprimand, and would I have the
courage to go so far as to rashly plunge in lewd habits? Besides, I am
still young in years, and have no notion what is implied by lewdness!"

"Not so!" exclaimed the Fairy; "lewdness, although one thing in
principle is, as far as meaning goes, subject to different
constructions; as is exemplified by those in the world whose heart is
set upon lewdness. Some delight solely in faces and figures; others find
insatiable pleasure in singing and dancing; some in dalliance and
raillery; others in the incessant indulgence of their lusts; and these
regret that all the beautiful maidens under the heavens cannot minister
to their short-lived pleasure. These several kinds of persons are foul
objects steeped skin and all in lewdness. The lustful love, for
instance, which has sprung to life and taken root in your natural
affections, I and such as myself extend to it the character of an
abstract lewdness; but abstract lewdness can be grasped by the mind, but
cannot be transmitted by the mouth; can be fathomed by the spirit, but
cannot be divulged in words. As you now are imbued with this desire only
in the abstract, you are certainly well fit to be a trustworthy friend
in (Fairyland) inner apartments, but, on the path of the mortal world,
you will inevitably be misconstrued and defamed; every mouth will
ridicule you; every eye will look down upon you with contempt. After
meeting recently your worthy ancestors, the two Dukes of Ning and Jung,
who opened their hearts and made their wishes known to me with such
fervour, (but I will not have you solely on account of the splendour of
our inner apartments look down despisingly upon the path of the world),
I consequently led you along, my son, and inebriated you with luscious
wines, steeped you in spiritual tea, and admonished you with excellent
songs, bringing also here a young sister of mine, whose infant name is
Chien Mei, and her style K'o Ching, to be given to you as your wedded
wife. To-night, the time will be propitious and suitable for the
immediate consummation of the union, with the express object of letting
you have a certain insight into the fact that if the condition of the
abode of spirits within the confines of Fairyland be still so
(imperfect), how much the more so should be the nature of the affections
which prevail in the dusty world; with the intent that from this time
forth you should positively break loose from bondage, perceive and amend
your former disposition, devote your attention to the works of Confucius
and Mencius, and set your steady purpose upon the principles of
morality."

Having ended these remarks, she initiated him into the mysteries of
licentious love, and, pushing Pao-yue into the room, she closed the door,
and took her departure all alone. Pao-yue in a dazed state complied with
the admonitions given him by the Fairy, and the natural result was, of
course, a violent flirtation, the circumstances of which it would be
impossible to recount.

When the next day came, he was by that time so attached to her by ties
of tender love and their conversation was so gentle and full of charm
that he could not brook to part from K'o Ching. Hand-in-hand, the two of
them therefore, went out for a stroll, when they unexpectedly reached a
place, where nothing else met their gaze than thorns and brambles, which
covered the ground, and a wolf and a tiger walking side by side. Before
them stretched the course of a black stream, which obstructed their
progress; and over this stream there was, what is more, no bridge to
enable one to cross it.

While they were exercising their minds with perplexity, they suddenly
espied the Fairy coming from the back in pursuit of them. "Desist at
once," she exclaimed, "from making any advance into the stream; it is
urgent that you should, with all speed, turn your faces round!"

Pao-yue lost no time in standing still. "What is this place?" he
inquired.

"This is the Ford of Enticement," explained the Fairy. "Its depth is ten
thousand chang; its breadth is a thousand li; in its stream there are no
boats or paddles by means of which to effect a passage. There is simply
a raft, of which Mu Chu-shih directs the rudder, and which Hui Shih chen
punts with the poles. They receive no compensation in the shape of gold
or silver, but when they come across any one whose destiny it is to
cross, they ferry him over. You now have by accident strolled as far as
here, and had you fallen into the stream you would have rendered quite
useless the advice and admonition which I previously gave you."

These words were scarcely concluded, when suddenly was heard from the
midst of the Ford of Enticement, a sound like unto a peal of thunder,
whereupon a whole crowd of gobblins and sea-urchins laid hands upon
Pao-yue and dragged him down.

This so filled Pao-yue with consternation that he fell into a
perspiration as profuse as rain, and he simultaneously broke forth and
shouted, "Rescue me, K'o Ching!"

These cries so terrified Hsi Jen and the other waiting-maids, that they
rushed forward, and taking Pao-yue in their arms, "Don't be afraid,
Pao-yue," they said, "we are here."

But we must observe that Mrs. Ch'in was just inside the apartment in the
act of recommending the young waiting-maids to be mindful that the cats
and dogs did not start a fight, when she unawares heard Pao-yue, in his
dream, call her by her infant name. In a melancholy mood she therefore
communed within herself, "As far as my infant name goes, there is, in
this establishment, no one who has any idea what it is, and how is it
that he has come to know it, and that he utters it in his dream?" And
she was at this period unable to fathom the reason. But, reader, listen
to the explanations given in the chapter which follows.




CHAPTER VI.

  Chia Pao-yue reaps his first experience in licentious love.
  Old Goody Liu pays a visit to the Jung Kuo Mansion.


Mrs. Ch'in, to resume our narrative, upon hearing Pao-yue call her in his
dream by her infant name, was at heart very exercised, but she did not
however feel at liberty to make any minute inquiry.

Pao-yue was, at this time, in such a dazed state, as if he had lost
something, and the servants promptly gave him a decoction of lungngan.
After he had taken a few sips, he forthwith rose and tidied his clothes.

Hsi Jen put out her hand to fasten the band of his garment, and as soon
as she did so, and it came in contact with his person, it felt so icy
cold to the touch, covered as it was all over with perspiration, that
she speedily withdrew her hand in utter surprise.

"What's the matter with you?" she exclaimed.

A blush suffused Pao-yue's face, and he took Hsi Jen's hand in a tight
grip. Hsi Jen was a girl with all her wits about her; she was besides a
couple of years older than Pao-yue and had recently come to know
something of the world, so that at the sight of his state, she to a
great extent readily accounted for the reason in her heart. From modest
shame, she unconsciously became purple in the face, and not venturing to
ask another question she continued adjusting his clothes. This task
accomplished, she followed him over to old lady Chia's apartments; and
after a hurry-scurry meal, they came back to this side, and Hsi Jen
availed herself of the absence of the nurses and waiting-maids to hand
Pao-yue another garment to change.

"Please, dear Hsi Jen, don't tell any one," entreated Pao-yue, with
concealed shame.

"What did you dream of?" inquired Hsi Jen, smiling, as she tried to
stifle her blushes, "and whence comes all this perspiration?"

"It's a long story," said Pao-yue, "which only a few words will not
suffice to explain."

He accordingly recounted minutely, for her benefit, the subject of his
dream. When he came to where the Fairy had explained to him the
mysteries of love, Hsi Jen was overpowered with modesty and covered her
face with her hands; and as she bent down, she gave way to a fit of
laughter. Pao-yue had always been fond of Hsi Jen, on account of her
gentleness, pretty looks and graceful and elegant manner, and he
forthwith expounded to her all the mysteries he had been taught by the
Fairy.

Hsi Jen was, of course, well aware that dowager lady Chia had given her
over to Pao-yue, so that her present behaviour was likewise no
transgression. And subsequently she secretly attempted with Pao-yue a
violent flirtation, and lucky enough no one broke in upon them during
their tete-a-tete. From this date, Pao-yue treated Hsi Jen with special
regard, far more than he showed to the other girls, while Hsi Jen
herself was still more demonstrative in her attentions to Pao-yue. But
for a time we will make no further remark about them.

As regards the household of the Jung mansion, the inmates may, on adding
up the total number, not have been found many; yet, counting the high as
well as the low, there were three hundred persons and more. Their
affairs may not have been very numerous, still there were, every day,
ten and twenty matters to settle; in fact, the household resembled, in
every way, ravelled hemp, devoid even of a clue-end, which could be used
as an introduction.

Just as we were considering what matter and what person it would be best
to begin writing of, by a lucky coincidence suddenly from a distance of
a thousand li, a person small and insignificant as a grain of mustard
seed happened, on account of her distant relationship with the Jung
family, to come on this very day to the Jung mansion on a visit. We
shall therefore readily commence by speaking of this family, as it after
all affords an excellent clue for a beginning.

The surname of this mean and humble family was in point of fact Wang.
They were natives of this district. Their ancestor had filled a minor
office in the capital, and had, in years gone by, been acquainted with
lady Feng's grandfather, that is madame Wang's father. Being covetous of
the influence and affluence of the Wang family, he consequently joined
ancestors with them, and was recognised by them as a nephew.

At that time, there were only madame Wang's eldest brother, that is lady
Feng's father, and madame Wang herself, who knew anything of these
distant relations, from the fact of having followed their parents to the
capital. The rest of the family had one and all no idea about them.

This ancestor had, at this date, been dead long ago, leaving only one
son called Wang Ch'eng. As the family estate was in a state of ruin, he
once more moved outside the city walls and settled down in his native
village. Wang Ch'eng also died soon after his father, leaving a son,
known in his infancy as Kou Erh, who married a Miss Liu, by whom he had
a son called by the infant name of Pan Erh, as well as a daughter,
Ch'ing Erh. His family consisted of four, and he earned a living from
farming.

As Kou Erh was always busy with something or other during the day and
his wife, dame Liu, on the other hand, drew the water, pounded the rice
and attended to all the other domestic concerns, the brother and sister,
Ch'ing Erh and Pan Erh, the two of them, had no one to look after them.
(Hence it was that) Kou Erh brought over his mother-in-law, old goody
Liu, to live with them.

This goody Liu was an old widow, with a good deal of experience. She had
besides no son round her knees, so that she was dependent for her
maintenance on a couple of acres of poor land, with the result that when
her son-in-law received her in his home, she naturally was ever willing
to exert heart and mind to help her daughter and her son-in-law to earn
their living.

This year, the autumn had come to an end, winter had commenced, and the
weather had begun to be quite cold. No provision had been made in the
household for the winter months, and Kou Erh was, inevitably,
exceedingly exercised in his heart. Having had several cups of wine to
dispel his distress, he sat at home and tried to seize upon every trifle
to give vent to his displeasure. His wife had not the courage to force
herself in his way, and hence goody Liu it was who encouraged him, as
she could not bear to see the state of the domestic affairs.

"Don't pull me up for talking too much," she said; "but who of us
country people isn't honest and open-hearted? As the size of the bowl we
hold, so is the quantity of the rice we eat. In your young days, you
were dependent on the support of your old father, so that eating and
drinking became quite a habit with you; that's how, at the present time,
your resources are quite uncertain; when you had money, you looked
ahead, and didn't mind behind; and now that you have no money, you
blindly fly into huffs. A fine fellow and a capital hero you have made!
Living though we now be away from the capital, we are after all at the
feet of the Emperor; this city of Ch'ang Ngan is strewn all over with
money, but the pity is that there's no one able to go and fetch it away;
and it's no use your staying at home and kicking your feet about."

"All you old lady know," rejoined Kou Erh, after he had heard what she
had to say, "is to sit on the couch and talk trash! Is it likely you
would have me go and play the robber?"

"Who tells you to become a robber?" asked goody Liu. "But it would be
well, after all, that we should put our heads together and devise some
means; for otherwise, is the money, pray, able of itself to run into our
house?"

"Had there been a way," observed Kou Erh, smiling sarcastically, "would
I have waited up to this moment? I have besides no revenue collectors as
relatives, or friends in official positions; and what way could we
devise? 'But even had I any, they wouldn't be likely, I fear, to pay any
heed to such as ourselves!"

"That, too, doesn't follow," remarked goody Liu; "the planning of
affairs rests with man, but the accomplishment of them rests with
Heaven. After we have laid our plans, we may, who can say, by relying on
the sustenance of the gods, find some favourable occasion. Leave it to
me, I'll try and devise some lucky chance for you people! In years gone
by, you joined ancestors with the Wang family of Chin Ling, and twenty
years back, they treated you with consideration; but of late, you've
been so high and mighty, and not condescended to go and bow to them,
that an estrangement has arisen. I remember how in years gone by, I and
my daughter paid them a visit. The second daughter of the family was
really so pleasant and knew so well how to treat people with kindness,
and without in fact any high airs! She's at present the wife of Mr.
Chia, the second son of the Jung Kuo mansion; and I hear people say that
now that she's advanced in years, she's still more considerate to the
poor, regardful of the old, and very fond of preparing vegetable food
for the bonzes and performing charitable deeds. The head of the Wang
mansion has, it is true, been raised to some office on the frontier, but
I hope that this lady Secunda will anyhow notice us. How is it then that
you don't find your way as far as there; for she may possibly remember
old times, and some good may, no one can say, come of it? I only wish
that she would display some of her kind-heartedness, and pluck one hair
from her person which would be, yea thicker than our waist."

"What you suggest, mother, is quite correct," interposed Mrs. Liu, Kou
Erh's wife, who stood by and took up the conversation, "but with such
mouth and phiz as yours and mine, how could we present ourselves before
her door? Why I fear that the man at her gate won't also like to go and
announce us! and we'd better not go and have our mouths slapped in
public!"

Kou Erh, who would have thought it, prized highly both affluence and
fame, so that when he heard these remarks, he forthwith began to feel at
heart a little more at ease. When he furthermore heard what his wife had
to say, he at once caught up the word as he smiled.

"Old mother," he rejoined; "since that be your idea, and what's more,
you have in days gone by seen this lady on one occasion, why shouldn't
you, old lady, start to-morrow on a visit to her and first ascertain how
the wind blows!"

"Ai Ya!" exclaimed old Goody, "It may very well be said that the
marquis' door is like the wide ocean! what sort of thing am I? why the
servants of that family wouldn't even recognise me! even were I to go,
it would be on a wild goose chase."

"No matter about that," observed Kou Erh; "I'll tell you a good way; you
just take along with you, your grandson, little Pan Erh, and go first
and call upon Chou Jui, who is attached to that household; and when once
you've seen him, there will be some little chance. This Chou Jui, at one
time, was connected with my father in some affair or other, and we were
on excellent terms with him."

"That I too know," replied goody Liu, "but the thing is that you've had
no dealings with him for so long, that who knows how he's disposed
towards us now? this would be hard to say. Besides, you're a man, and
with a mouth and phiz like that of yours, you couldn't, on any account,
go on this errand. My daughter is a young woman, and she too couldn't
very well go and expose herself to public gaze. But by my sacrificing
this old face of mine, and by going and knocking it (against the wall)
there may, after all, be some benefit and all of us might reap profit."

That very same evening, they laid their plans, and the next morning
before the break of day, old goody Liu speedily got up, and having
performed her toilette, she gave a few useful hints to Pan Erh; who,
being a child of five or six years of age, was, when he heard that he
was to be taken into the city, at once so delighted that there was
nothing that he would not agree to.

Without further delay, goody Liu led off Pan Erh, and entered the city,
and reaching the Ning Jung street, she came to the main entrance of the
Jung mansion, where, next to the marble lions, were to be seen a crowd
o